1
Carbon Impurities on Graphene Synthesized by Chemical Vapor Deposition on Platinum 
Jinglei Ping1,2 and Michael S. Fuhrer1,2 
1Center for nanophysics and Advanced Materials, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
20742-4111, USA, 2School of Physics, Monash University 3800 Victoria, Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
We report nanocrystalline carbon impurities coexisting with graphene synthesized via 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on platinum. We observe micron-size island-like 
impurity layers, which can easily be mistaken for second graphene layers in optical 
microscopy or secondary electron microscopy (SEM). The island orientation depends 
on the crystalline orientation of the Pt, as shown by electron backscatter 
diffraction(EBSD), indicating growth of amorphous carbon below graphene. Dark-field 
TEM indicates that in addition to uniform single-crystal graphene, our sample is 
decorated with nanocrystalline carbon impurities with a spatially inhomogeneous 
distribution. Raman spectra show a large D peak, however electrical characterization 
shows high mobility (~6,000 cm2/Vs), indicating a limitation for Raman spectroscopy 
in characterizing the electronic quality of graphene.2
Platinum was recently developed as the catalytic substrate metal for CVD of graphene[1]. 
While copper, another promising and widely-used catalytic metal, requires low-pressure 
synthesis conditions[2] to produce large(>100 µm) single-crystal monolayer graphene, Pt 
substrates could achieve this with ambient-pressure growth conditions. The electrolysis 
transfer method[1], which is not applicable to Cu due to its high activity, can remove 
graphene synthesized on Pt free of metal and avoid etchant residues. Particularly, the 
melting point of Pt, 1768 °C, is 683 °C higher than that of Cu, 1085 °C, providing an 
opportunity to study carbon deposition at high temperature. There are also intriguing 
phenomena observed for graphene grown on Pt, such as sizable (~10µm) multi-layer 
graphene pyramids and wrinkles twisting graphene from Bernal stacking to rhombohedral 
stacking[3]. However, graphene synthesized on Pt has not been characterized extensively. 
Here we characterize Pt-synthesized graphene with optical microscopy, scanning electron 
microscopy 
(SEM), 
electron 
backscatter 
diffraction 
(EBSD), 
transmission 
electron 
microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman spectroscopy, and electrical 
transport measurements. We identify novel carbon impurity structures that have not been 
observed in graphene synthesized by other methods. These impurities consist of 
nanocrystalline sp2 carbon, and can cause considerable confusion in characterizing the layer 
number and defect concentration by conventional methods.  
 
 
Results 
 
Figure 1a shows an SEM micrograph of the sample on Pt foil, and Figure 1b shows an 
optical micrograph of the sample after transfer to SiO2/Si. As will be shown below, monolayer 
graphene covers the whole surface, but optical and SEM micrographs show few-micron-sized 
islands of increased contrast. Characterization of graphene on the Pt substrate via energy 
dispersive spectroscopy shows no significant peaks except carbon and Pt (data not shown in this 
paper). The size, morphology and configuration of the islands, as shown in Figure 1a, depend on 
the crystalline orientations of the Pt substrate which are distinguished by contrast in SEM images3
due to the tunneling effect of the secondary electrons. Such correlation will be investigated 
further via EBSD below in Figure 2. 
 
Typically graphene is transferred onto silicon dioxide substrates facing the same direction 
as it is on Pt, i.e. the side originally touching the metal surface touches the silicon dioxide 
surface after transfer. Imaging the topography of graphene transferred in this “normal” way 
requires removal of the transfer support, typically poly(methyl methacrylate) ( PMMA), in which 
case PMMA residue may contaminate the image. To investigate the topography of graphene 
grown on Pt without exposing the surface to be probed to PMMA, we use an “up-side-down” 
transfer method: we transfer the graphene/PMMA stack to SiO2/Si with the graphene on top, and 
do not remove the PMMA.  
 
Figure 1c shows an AFM image of graphene/PMMA transferred by the “up-side-down” 
method. The surface being imaged has had no contact with PMMA. Islands similar in morphology 
to those seen in Figs. 1a and b can be identified in the AFM image with height of about 0.35 nm 
to more than 1 nm. We also observed two types of wrinkles in graphene transferred by this 
method: raised wrinkles which were valleys in graphene on the Pt growth substrate and may 
represent the Pt metal grain boundaries, and indented wrinkles which were raised when 
graphene was on Pt, and likely arose from the differential thermal expansion between graphene 
and Pt[4]. Such narrow wrinkles are not the consequence of the transfer process as graphene 
adheres tightly to the 300nm thick PMMA and only wrinkles close to that scale can result from 
transfer. 
 
We identify the orientations of monocrystal Pt via EBSD and image the island layers 
grown on corresponding Pt grains via SEM. Crystalline orientations can be compeletely described 
by either the combination of plane direction and crystal direction {h k l}<u v w> or Euler angles 
(!1, ", !2). Index {h k l} represents atomic arrangements on the cleavage surface, the last Euler 
angle, !2, represents rotation of the crystal in the plane of cleavage surface with respect to the 
reference direction (RD), provided that Bunge’s (passive) description is used. As an example 
given in Figure 2, maps of inverse pole figure (IPF), Figure 2b, and Euler angles, Figure 2c, are 
shown for three monocrystals A, B, and C as in Figure 2a. Given {h k l} and !2, we obtain the4
top-view of the crystals shown in Figure 2g-i. We define a direction in the cleavage face along 
the most exposed atoms on the top layer, representing the anisotropy of this facet. We found 
that the defined direction coincides with the longitudinal axis of the impurity layers, if there is 
one. For cleavage faces lacking such an axis, as in case A of Figure 2d, the impurity layers do not 
show obvious anisotropy. Thus the anisotropy of the crystal face does relate with that of the 
morphology of the impurity layers. This relationship holds for about 50 grains on the sample that 
have been scanned.!
 
Now we turn to investigate the crystalline structure of graphene and the impurities. 
Electron diffraction pattern and dark field images have been proved an efficient beyond Raman 
spectroscopy[5] in the sense of resolution and identification of layer-number and stacking-
sequence[3,6]. Diffraction pattern provides grain orientations[3]; corresponding dark field 
images provide mappings of grains and stacking-sequence[6,7,8]. Specifically, contrast in the 
second order dark field image is sufficient to identify layer-number variation[6].  
 
To investigate the structure of our samples via TEM, we transferred them onto 10 nm 
thick silicon nitride membranes. Figure 3a is a bright-field TEM image of the sample showing an 
island similar to those seen in Fig. 1. Figure 3b shows the corresponding electron diffraction 
pattern. The diffraction pattern contains (1) bright main spots corresponding to monolayer 
graphene (2) a diffuse background from the amorphous Si3N4 membrane, and (3) sharp rings at 
the same radius as the monolayer graphene spots, with varying intensity along the rings, 
including some discrete spots. The pattern of intensity variation along the first-order and second-
order rings has six-fold symmetry; the wave vector and symmetry of the sharp rings is entirely 
consistent with graphene indicating that the rings originate from crystalline graphitic carbon. 
Note that the possibility of the existence of additional carbon adatoms or/and nano-size isolated 
amorphous carbon cannot be excluded as these would be difficult to detect in diffraction. Dark 
field images of the first-order (Figure 3c) and second-order (Figure 3d) graphene diffraction 
spots are fairly uniform indicating that a monolayer of graphene corresponding to the main 
diffraction spots covers the whole image area. The second-order dark field image (Figure 3d) 
demonstrates that overwhelming majority of the additional material in the island region does not5
share the same orientation with the background monolayer graphene, though there are minority 
parts with a radial configuration and sizes ranging from nm to 100 nm that do align with the 
continuous monolayer. This observation is in contrast with bilayer graphene impurities in 
graphene grown on Cu[9], Ni[10,11] and Fe[12], and hardly Raman-detectable due to their 
small sizes.  
 
Figure 3e shows an additional dark-field TEM image, with a larger aperture to include 
many diffraction spots on the sharp second-order ring. Here dark field TEM shows bright domains 
distributing throughout the whole surface inhomogeneously. The correspondence between the 
dark region in the bright field image Figure 3a and bright region in the dark field image Figure 3d 
and 3e confirms that the bright domains in Figure 3d and 3e mainly represent carbon impurities 
as an additional layer instead of crystalline defects in the continuous monolayer. This is the 
major finding of this paper: nanocrystalline graphene, misoriented with respect to the underlying 
continuous monolayer graphene, exists across the entire sample. The impurity graphene is 
inhomogeneously distributed, with a higher concentration in few-micron-sized island regions, but 
concentrations also detected outside the islands. This is consistent with what we observed by 
optical microscope and AFM. 
 
We now turn to Raman spectroscopy of our Pt-grown graphene samples, using a 633 nm 
laser excitation source and a confocal microscope to map the Raman spectra at the submicron 
scale. Figure 4a (inset) shows a typical Raman spectrum of graphene grown on Pt similar to 
those examined in Figs. 1 and 3 and a reference sample grown on copper (with reduced carbon 
impurities as seen in TEM). It is immediately evident that the Raman spectrum for the Pt-grown 
graphene with carbon impurities is distinct from that reported for exfoliated graphene[5] or Cu-
grown CVD graphene shown here or reported before[2]. The Pt-grown graphene exhibits a 
pronounced and extremely wide D peak and broad wings to the G peak. The spectrum could be 
consistent with the superposition of a graphene spectrum (with sharp G and 2D peaks) with a 
spectrum of nanocrystalline graphitic carbon (with very broad D and G peaks, and similar G and 
D intensities). The ID:IG ratio attributed to the nanocrystalline graphene is about 1:1, 
corresponding to a grain size of order 10 nm[13]. The main panels of Figure 4a show the G and6
2D peaks in greater detail. Excepting the broad background, the G peak of the impurity-
decorated sample is similar in width, but slightly upshifted in position, compared to those of the 
Cu-grown sample (and typical exfoliated graphene samples). The impurity-decorated sample also 
shows a somewhat broader, upshifted, but still Lorentzian 2D peak. 
 
Figure 4b shows Raman spectra of the impurity-decorated Pt-grown graphene taken 
along a line crossing an impurity island as shown in the inset. Raman spectra both on the island 
and off show the broad background in the D and G peak regions, indicating nanocrystalline 
graphitic carbon. The 2D peak remains Lorentzian everywhere, showing no evidence of large-
sized Bernal-stacked graphite. An upshift of the 2D peak is associated with the island region, 
while the G peak is hardly changed in width or position. The consistency of the G peak excludes 
doping as the cause of the changes observed in the 2D peak[14]. Instead, the blueshift of 2D 
peak is in consistent with what was observed in turbostratic graphene[15,16] supporting our 
identification of the impurity carbon as graphitic but largely mis-aligned with the continuous 
monolayer graphene.  
 
Figure 4c shows the electrical conductivity as a function of back-gate voltage of the 
impurity-decorated Pt-grown graphene transferred to a SiO2/Si substrate. The field effect 
mobility is about 6000 cm2V-1s-1, comparable to other graphene samples obtained by CVD[2, 17] 
showing much lower D peaks in Raman spectra. Again this is indicative that the D peak in our 
samples arises from defects in the carbon impurity layer, not in the continuous monolayer. We 
also explored the conductivity of a Hall bar region from which the impurity islands were excluded 
by etching and found only a slight mobility change (Figure 4c) indicating that the impurity island 
regions are not entirely responsible for the decreased mobility compared to exfoliated graphene 
on SiO2[18,19].  
 
Discussion 
 
We have thoroughly characterized graphene grown by ambient-pressure CVD on Pt foils. 
We first find that many samples exhibit nano-crystalline graphitic carbon impurities in addition to 
a continuous single crystal monolayer graphene. The impurities are distributed inhomogeneously,7
especially concentrated in few-micron-sized island domains, but present everywhere on the 
sample. 
It is important to understand whether the impurity carbon is deposited on top of the 
monolayer graphene or forms underneath. Our EBSD results show a strong correlation between 
the anisotropy of the impurity islands and the crystalline orientation of the Pt substrate (Figure 
2), but not the crystalline orientation of the graphene which is continuous across many Pt grains.  
The correlation strongly suggests that the impurity islands form beneath the monolayer 
graphene at the Pt surface; given that the islands are not highly crystalline themselves the 
anisotropy probably results from anisotropic diffusion of carbon along the Pt. The detailed 
mechanism of the carbon cluster formation calls for further theoretical investigation[20,21]. Thus 
we can confirm the growth-from-below model for graphene on Pt[9].  
Our investigation also points out difficulties and potential pitfalls in the standard 
characterization of multi-layered graphene by optical absorption and Raman spectroscopy. We 
find that amorphous carbon impurity islands can be easily mistaken for multi-layer regions in 
optical images. Characterization by TEM is thus important for reports of new synthesis methods 
for graphene, since it gives the most accurate crystalline information. The Raman spectra of our 
sample shows a very large and broad D feature normally associated with highly defected 
carbon[13]. Here we have associated the enhancement of D peak with carbon impurities; the 
high electronic quality of our sample excludes the possibility that the defects responsible for the 
D band are in the continuous monolayer graphene. The effects of carbon impurities on the 
electronic transport is a topic for further investigation. 
 
Methods 
 
The graphene samples studied here were grown at 1000 °C on a 0.2 mm thick platinum 
foil under flowing ambient pressure gas mixture of 700 sccm hydrogen and 5 sccm methane[1].8
 
Figure 1.  Scanning electron micrograph(a), optical micrograph(b), and atomic force micrograph 
(c) of graphene grown by ambient-pressure chemical vapor deposition on Pt foil. Image (a) is as-
grown sample on Pt foil; the scale bar is 5 µm. The three large areas of different contrast are 
three crystalline grains of the Pt foil. Image (b) is taken after transfer of graphene to SiO2/Si 
substrate; the scale bar is 10 µm. Image (c) is taken on graphene on poly methylmethacrylate 
transfer layer transferred “upside-down” to SiO2/Si. The scale bar is 5 µm. Raised and lowered 
wrinkles are indicated by white and black arrows respectively. In all cases few-micron-sized 
islands of different contrast are evident.9
 
Figure 2.  The SEM image (a) shows platinum substrate with 3 grains A, B, and C of different 
orientations, whose IPF map and Euler angles map are shown in (b) and (c). The plane direction 
{h k l} and the last Euler angle !2 are shown in the corresponding map. The atomic arrangement 
are shown respectively in (g), (h), and (i) below detailed SEM images in (d), (e), and (f) marked 
with directions, if exist, defined in the text. The angles formed by the axes and the RD are also 
shown in the SEM images to guide eyes. The scale bars in (a) and (b) are 5 µm.10
 
Figure 3. Transmission electron microscopy and diffraction of Pt-grown graphene. (a) Bright 
field image with scale bar of 1 µm. (b) Electron diffraction pattern corresponding to sample in 
(a). (c-e) Dark field images corresponding to orange (c), blue (d) and magenta (e) apertures 
indicated in (b).11
 
Figure 4.  Raman spectroscopy and electrical characterization of Pt-grown graphene. (a) Raman 
spectra of a Pt-grown graphene sample with impurities similar to Figures 1 and 2 is shown in red, 
and for comparison Raman spectra from a Cu-grown graphene sample without impurity regions 
is shown in blue. Inset shows full spectra while main panel shows the G and 2D peak regions, 
with peak positions in wavenumbers (cm-1). Lorentzian fits to the 2D peaks are shown in green. 
(b) Raman spectra taken at points with spacing of 0.31 µm along the 9 µm long black segment in12
the optical image in inset. The position or blueshift of the 2D peak is extracted from Raman 
spectral and projected onto the real-position optical image. The length of the yellow and green 
arrows is 15.32 cm-1. Note that the maximum blueshift happens inside the edge of the island due 
to µm resolution of Raman microscopy. (c) Conductivity as a function of back gate voltage for a 
Pt-grown graphene sample with impurities on 300 nm SiO2/Si substrate. An image of the Hall bar 
device is shown in the inset; the top and bottom electrodes are used to source and sink current. 
The width of the Hall bar is 10 µm. The red data curves correspond to voltages measured 
between electrodes A and C at 4.2 K and room temperature (RT) before etching. The blue curve 
corresponds to voltage probes A and B after the blue-shadowed region in the inset optical image 
was removed by etching.13
References  
[1] Gao, L. ; Ren, W. ; Xu, H. ; Jin, L. ; Wang, Z. ; Ma, T. ; Ma, L.-P. ; Zhang, Z. ; Fu, Q. ; 
Peng, L.-M. et al. Repeated growth and bubbling transfer of graphene with millimetre-size single-
crystal grains using platinum. Nature Comm. 2012, 3(699) :1-7. 
[2] Li, X. ; Cai, W. ; An, J. ; Kim, S. ; Nah, J. ; Yang, D. ; Piner, R. ; Velamakanni, A. ; Jung, 
I. ; Tutuc, E. et al., Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper 
foils. Science 2009, 324(5932) :1312-4. 
[3] Meyer, J. C. ; Geim, A. K. ; Katsnelson, M. I. ; Novoselov, K. S. ; Booth, T. J. ; Roth, S. 
The structure of suspended graphene sheets. Nature 2007, 446 :60-3. 
[4] Liu, N.; Pan, Z.; Fu, L.; Zhang, C.; Dai, B.; Liu, Z. The origin of wrinkles on transferred 
graphene. Nano Res. 2011, 4(10):996-1004. 
[5] Ferrari, A. C. ; Meyer, J. C. ; Scardaci, V. ; Casiraghi, C. ; Lazzeri, M. ; Mauri, F. ; Piscanec, 
S. ; Jiang, D. ; Novoselov, K. S. ; Roth, S. ; Geim, A. K. Raman spectrum of graphene and 
graphene layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97:187401-4. 
[6] Ping, J. and Fuhrer, M. Layer number and stacking sequence imaging of few-layer 
graphene by transmission electron microscopy. Nano Lett. 2012, 12(9):4635-41. 
[7] Huang, P. Y.; Ruiz-Vargas, C. S.; van der Zande, A. M.; Whitney, W. S.; Levendorf, M. P.; 
Kevek, J. W.; Garg, S.; Alden, J. S.; Hustedt, C. J.; Park, J. Grains and grain boundaries in 
single-layer graphene atomic patchwork quilts. Nature 2011, 469:389-92. 
[8] Brown, L.; Hovden, R.; Huang, P.; Wojcik, M.; Muller, D. A.; Park, J. Nano Lett. Twinning 
and twisting of tri- and bilayer graphene. 2012, 12(3):1609-15. 
[9] Nie, S. ; Wu, W. ; Xing, S. ; Yu, Q. ; Bao, J. ; Pei, S. ; McCarty, K. F. Growth from below : 
bilayer graphene on copper by chemical vapor deposition. New J. Phys. 2012, 14(093028) :1-9.14
[10] Umair, A. and Raza, H. Controlled synthesis of bilayer graphene on nickel. Nanoscale Res. 
Lett. 2012, 7(437):1-5. 
[11] Dahal, A.; Addou, R.; Sutter, P.; Batzill, M. Graphene monolayer rotation on Ni(111) 
facilitates bilayer graphene growth. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100(241602):1-4. 
[12] Xue, Y.; Wu, B.; Guo, Y.; Huang, L.; Jiang, L.; Chen, J.; Geng, D.; Liu, Y.; Hu, W.; Yu, G. 
Synthesis of large-area, few-layer graphene on iron foil by chemical vapor deposition. Nano Res 
2011, 4(12):1208-14. 
[13] Lucchese, M. M.; Stavale, F.; Martins Ferreira, E. H.; Vilani, C.; Moutinho, M. V. O.; 
Capaz, R. B.; Achete, C. A.; Jorio, A. Quantifying ion-induced defects and Raman relaxation 
length in graphene. Carbon 2010, 48(5):1592-7. 
[14] Das, A.; Pisana, S.; Chakraborty, B.; Piscanec, S.; Saha, S. K.; Waghmare, U. V.; 
Novoselov, K. S.; Krishnamurthy, H. R.; Geim, A. K.; Ferrari, A. C. et al. Monitoring dopants by 
Raman scattering in an electrochemically top-gated graphene transistor. Nature Nano. 2008, 
3:210-5. 
[15] Poncharal, P.; Ayari, A.; Michel, T.; Sauvajol, J.-L. Raman spectra of misoriented bilayer 
graphene. Phys. Rev. B 2008 78(113407):1-4. 
[16] Lenski, D. R. and Fuhrer, M. S. Raman and optical characterization of multilayer 
turbostratic graphene grown via chemical vapor depostion. J. Appl. Phys. 2011, 110(013720):1-
4. 
[17] Cao, H.; Yu, Q.; Jauregui, L. A.; Tian, J.; Wu, W.; Liu, Z.; Jalilian, R.; Benjamin, D. K; 
Jiang, Z; Bao, J. et al. Electronic transport in chemical vapor deposited graphene synthesized on 
Cu: quantum hall effect and weak localization. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96(122106):1-3. 
[18] Morozov, S. V.; Novoselov, K. S.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Schedin, F.; Elias, D. C.; Jaszczak, J. 
A.; Geim, A. K. Giant intrinsic carrier mobilities in graphene and its bilayer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2008, 100(016602):1-4.15
[19] Du, X.; Skachko, I.; Barker, A.; Andrer, E. Y. Approaching ballistic transport in suspended 
graphene. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3:491-5. 
[20] Zhang, W.; Wu, P.; Li, Z.;Yang J. First-principles thermodynamics of graphene growth on 
Cu surfaces. J. Phys. Chem. 2011, 115:17782-7. 
[21] Chen, H.; Zhu, W.; Zhang, Z. Contrasting behavior of carbon nucleation in the initial 
stages of graphene epitaxial growth on stepped metal surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104 
(186101):1-4 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge support from the ONR-MURI program, and M.S.F. acknowledges support from 
an Australian Research Council Laureate Fellowship. We also acknowledge the support of the 
Maryland NanoCenter and use of Shared Experimental Facilities of the University of Maryland 
MRSEC (NSF grant DMR 05-20741) including the NispLab and of the facilities and the assistance 
of Xi-Ya Fang of at the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy.  
Author Contributions 
Jinglei Ping and Michael Sears Fuhrer conceived the experiments, discussed the results and co-
wrote the paper. Jinglei Ping performed the experiments and analyzed the data. 
Additional Information 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.