1 
 
Near-forward Raman selection rules of the phonon-polariton created by 
alloying in (Zn,Be)Se  
 
H. Dicko,1 O. Pagès,1,a) F. Firszt,2 K. Strzałkowski,2 W. Paszkowicz,3 A. Maillard,4 C. Jobard,4 
and L. Broch1 
 
1 LCP-A2MC, Institut Jean Barriol, Université de Lorraine, France 
2 Institute of Physics, N. Copernicus University, 87-100 Toruń, Poland 
3 Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-668 Warsaw, Poland 
4 LMOPS, Université de Lorraine – Sup´elec, 2, rue Edouard Belin, 57070 Metz, France 
 
Abstract 
The Raman selection rules of the (Zn-Se,Be-Se)-mixed phonon-polariton (PP) created by 
“alloying” in the three-mode [1x(-Zn-Se),2x(Be-Se)] Zn1-xBexSe system, whose dramatic S-like 
dispersion (∼200 cm-1) covers the large frequency gap between the Zn-Se and Be-Se spectral ranges, 
is studied in its wave vector () dependence by near-forward scattering. Both the collapse regime 
away from Γ and the reinforcement regime near Γ are addressed, using appropriate laser lines and 
Be contents. We find that in both regimes the considered PP, in fact a transverse mode with mixed 
mechanical-electrical character, obeys the same nominal Raman selection rules as its purely-
mechanical (PM) variant commonly observed in the backscattering geometry. Besides, marked 
differences in the PP Raman lineshapes in the two regimes give a hint about how the PP-like 
electrical field  develops while descending the S-like dispersion towards Γ. In the reinforcement 
regime  is large, leading to intra-mode on top of inter-mode  −mediated transfers of oscillator 
strength between the two Be-Se modes, that both exhibit a fine structure on account of the alloy 
disorder. In contrast, in the collapse regime  remains weak, as testified by the absence of intra-
mode transfer. The discussion is supported by contour modeling of the multi-PP Raman lineshapes in 
their -dependence within the linear dielectric approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed : 
   Email: Olivier.pages@univ-lorraine.fr2 
 
I. 
Introduction 
 
In such a polar crystal as a zincblende-type semiconductor crystal, the transverse optic (TO) 
phonons corresponding to vibrations of the anionic sublattice against the cationic one 
perpendicularly to the direction of propagation , are likely to be accompanied by an electrical field, 
notably a transverse one, hence identical in nature to that carried by a pure transverse electrical 
wave, namely a photon.1-3 The resulting TO excitation with mixed mechanical-electrical character is 
referred to as a phonon-polariton, abbreviated PP hereafter. Regarding applications, the PP’s are 
especially interesting in view of signal processing at terahertz (phonon-like) frequencies at light-like 
(photon-like) speed.4  
One remarkable feature of the photon-like transverse electrical field carried by a TO mode is 
that it can exist only very close to the centre Γ ( = 0) of the Brillouin zone. This is because the ‘	 vs. 
’ dispersion of a photon, governed by the speed of light in the crystal (scaled down from that in 
vacuum, i.e. 
, via the relative dielectric function  of the crystal), is quasi vertical on the  scale 
given by the Brillouin zone size. Far from Γ, i.e. from the natural dispersion of a photon, a transverse 
electrical field cannot propagate, and a TO mode then reduces to a purely-mechanical vibration. The 
corresponding frequency is referred to as 	 hereafter. Note that the electrical field carried by a 
longitudinal optic (LO) mode does not suffer such restriction, because it is not photon-like. As such it 
remains non dispersive (not -dependent), meaning that a LO mode vibrates at a fixed frequency 
near Γ, noted 	. As is well-known 	 > 	 since the spring-like restoring force of a purely-
mechanical TO mode is enhanced by the Coulombian interaction resulting from the LO-like electrical 
field.5 
The picture for PP’s propagating in the bulk of pure zincblende compounds is well established 
both theoretically and experimentally.6-8 Basically it can be casted into a model of a single (TO,LO) 
oscillator. A strong PP-coupling occurs when the horizontal phonon-like dispersion of a purely-
mechanical TO mode away from Γ, defined by 	, crosses the quasi vertical photon-like dispersion of 
a pure transverse electrical field near Γ. This gives rise to an anticrossing, resulting in two distinct PP 
branches. The upper one, labeled , is LO-like (	
 ∼	) near Γ (strictly at Γ the TO–LO 
degeneracy even occurs since the atom displacement can as well be viewed as perpendicular or 
parallel to , the latter being null in fact) and photon-like away from the phonon resonance (	 ≫
	); the dispersion is then dictated by , the relative dielectric constant of the crystal at ‘infinite’ 
frequency. The lower branch, noted , is photon-like well beneath the phonon resonance (	 ≪
	); the dispersion is then governed by the static relative dielectric constant , linked to  via the 
Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation. This lower branch ultimately assimilates the purely-mechanical TO 
mode (	
 ∼	) away from Γ.  
Little attention has been awarded to the PP’s propagating in multi-oscillator systems such as 
mixed crystals, the central issue in this work. Based on Maxwell’s equations, Poulet produced a 
generic calculation of the PP dispersion in a multi-oscillator assembly already in the seventies, that 
was useful to set the trend.9 Recently Bao et al. calculated the dispersion of the bulk and surface PP’s 
of various A1-xBxC zincblende mixed crystals, taken either as pseudo-infinite10 or confined11 (at one or 
two dimensions) media. In doing so they assumed a basic 2-mode [1×(A-C),1×(B-C)] behavior of the 
purely-mechanical TO modes from which the PP’s proceed. On the experimental side, the 
contributions are rather sparse. We are only aware of the pioneering study of the surface PP’s of the 
one-mode Al1-xGaxN and Al1-xInxN mixed crystals with wurtzite structure done by Ng et al.12 and by 
Ooi et al.,13 respectively, using far-infrared attenuated total reflectance, and of our own recent3 
 
Raman studies of the bulk PP’s of the three-mode [1×(Zn-Se),2×(Be-Se)] Zn1-xBexSe14 and [1×(Zn-
Se),2×(Zn-S)] ZnSe1-xSx
15,16 zincblende systems.  
What emerged from the above theoretical and experimental studies is that the A1-xBxC 
“alloying” creates an intermediary . branch with mixed (A-C,B-C) character between the lower 
 and upper  parent-like ones, now mostly related to the long/soft (say A-C) and short/stiff 
(B-C then) bonds, respectively. The . branch differs in nature from the  and  ones in 
that it exhibits a characteristic ‘	 vs. ’ S-like dispersion throughout the frequency gap between the 
B-C (upper) and A-C (lower) spectral ranges, governed by two asymptotic phonon frequencies, and 
not by any photon-like one. These are, away from Γ, the frequency of the BC-like purely-mechanical 
TO mode, and, near Γ, the frequency of the AC-like LO mode. An example of the above described PP 
dispersion is shown, e.g., in Ref. 15 for the particular ZnSe0.68S0.32 mixed crystal (see Fig. 1 therein). 
The . mode is further interesting with respect to the -dependence of its Raman intensity. The 
latter is large in the two asymptotic matter/phonon-like regimes (LO-like near Γ, and purely-
mechanical TO-like away from Γ) and small in the intermediary light/photon-like one, corresponding 
roughly to the inflexion of the S-branch. In fact, the TO-like downfall away from Γ and subsequent 
LO-like reinforcement near Γ nicely come out from calculations when using our generic expression of 
the -dependent multi-PP Raman cross section (see Ref. 16, recalled below). The two regimes have 
further been observed experimentally by Raman scattering, albeit separately, i.e. in Zn0.5Be0.5Se (see 
Fig. 4 of Ref. 14) and ZnSe0.68S0.32 (see Fig. 5 of Ref. 15), respectively. 
In the case of a multi-oscillator mixed crystal, i.e. falling beyond the basic two-mode (A-C and 
B-C) description, such as the three-oscillator [1x(Zn-Se),2x(Be-Se)] Zn1-xBexSe and [1x(Zn-Se),2x(Zn-S)] 
ZnSe1-xSx systems, the . branch duplicates. It becomes accompanied by a minor replica at high 
frequency, referred to as . hereafter, similar in every respect to ., notably in what regards 
the S-like shape, the double-phonon asymptotes and also the collapse and reinforcement regimes, 
except that its dispersion remains confined within the relevant (Be-Se or Zn-S) doublet of purely-
mechanical TO’s. The picture can be naturally extrapolated beyond the three-oscillator case.  
In this work our aim is to pursue the basic characterization of the main ‘alloy’-related . 
mode by examining its Raman selection rules both in its TO-like collapse regime and in its LO-like 
reinforcement one, using the same A1-xBxC mixed crystal for the sake of consistency (possibly playing 
with the composition   and with the laser excitation, though). We are only aware of two symmetry 
analysis of the PP Raman modes in the literature, done with the pure GaP7 and GaN17 compounds, 
and thus concerned with the (, ) modes. As for mixed crystals, the . (and also .) 
Raman selection rules remain unexplored so far. In our case it is a matter to elucidate whether the 
. mode created by “alloying” near Γ retains the symmetry of the purely-mechanical TO mode 
away from Γ from which it proceeds, or not, and also, whether the PP symmetry is preserved when 
passing on from the TO-like collapse regime to the LO-like reinforcement one, or not. On the 
experimental side certain conditions have to be fulfilled in view to tackle such issues, concerning 
both the used Raman scattering geometry and also the samples, as detailed below.  
Besides, we take this occasion of the planned comparison between the TO-like collapse and 
LO-like reinforcement regimes of the . mode, to further investigate an intriguing feature 
recently evidenced with ZnSe0.68S0.32. This feature, so far unexplained, is that the . peak 
drastically sharpens when it departs from the collapse regime and enters the reinforcement one (see 
Figs. 5 and 6 of Ref. 15). One may well wonder whether the trend is specific to ZnSe1-xSx, for some 
reason, or persists with another mixed crystal, being thus presumably general. In this case, the next 
issue would be to identify its possible mechanism.4 
 
 
II. 
Experiment: Raman scattering geometry and samples 
 
Generally, optical spectroscopies, such as Raman scattering, are well suited to study the PP’s, 
because the quasi-vertical dispersion of the laser probe places, by construction, the analysis near Γ. 
However, the access to the PP regime is not obvious for all that. For example, in the traditional 
backscattering geometry (schematically operating in ‘reflection’), the scattering angle ! between the 
wave vectors of the incident laser beam (") and of the scattered light (") is at maximum (∼180°). In 
this case, one addresses the largest achievable phonon wavector in a Raman scattering experiment, 
with magnitude of the order of a few percent of the Brillouin zone size. This falls deep into the 
asymptotical regime of purely-mechanical TO modes.6 In order to access the PP regime, the phonon 
wave vector has to be reduced by as much as two orders of magnitude. This requires to adopt very 
small ! values, typically below 5°, corresponding to a near-forward scattering geometry 
(schematically operating in ‘transmission’).6 Even in this case, generally one can hardly penetrate the 
PP dispersion towards Γ farther than the first half.6  
Also, the choice of system is crucial. Out of the two samples series at hand whose PP’s were 
successfully detected by near-forward Raman scattering so far, Zn1-xBexSe14 is preferred to ZnSe1-xSx
15 
on account of the dramatic S-like dispersion of its . mode, essentially due to the large frequency 
gap between the vibration spectral ranges of its constituent bonds (∼200 cm-1). In ZnSe1-xSx the 
frequency gap is so narrow (merely ∼40 cm-1) that the . mode enters almost straightaway its 
LO-like reinforcement regime without being detectable in the preceding TO-like collapse regime 
(when descending the S-like dispersion towards Γ). The latter, shrunk to a minimum, is somehow 
skipped out.15  
Appropriate Zn1-xBexSe samples are selected based on the intuitive ‘rule of thumb’ – verified 
theoretically (see below), that the frequency domain covered by the TO-like collapse regime of the 
. mode near Γ is large when the corresponding native signal of purely-mechanical TO mode 
away from Γ, namely the BeSe-like one in this case, is strong, and vice versa. With this respect, large 
Be contents seem optimal in view to explore the Raman selection rules in the TO-like collapse 
regime. Reversely, small Be contents may facilitate an access to the LO-like reinforcement regime 
closer to Γ, due to a shrinkage of the preceding TO-like collapse regime farther from Γ. However, care 
should be taken that the Be content be not too small, otherwise the penetration downward the S-like 
dispersion towards Γ would be less, thus reducing the chance to access the LO-like reinforcement 
regime. This results from the wave vector conservation law  = " −" governing the Raman 
scattering. Accordingly minimal  values are achieved by reducing the dispersion of the refractive 
index around the used laser line (refer to Eq. 2 below). With Zn1-xBexSe, this requires large Be 
contents and low energy laser lines.18  
Three large-size Zn1-xBexSe single crystals (cylinders, ∼8 mm in diameter, ∼5 mm in height) 
were grown from the melt by using the high-pressure Bridgman method, with small (x=0.12) and 
moderate (x=0.33) Be contents and with the maximum Be content (x=0.53) achievable by this 
technique. Owing to its low Be content, the former sample (12 at.% Be) is not relevant for the 
planned study of the . mode. It is only used to provide a reference insight into the Raman 
selection rules of the purely-mechanical ZnSe-like TO mode (that shows up strongly) in the 
backscattering geometry (see Fig. A-1a, Appendix Section). The corresponding backscattering-like 
insight into the doublet of purely-mechanical BeSe-like TO’s is likewise gained from the sample with5 
 
the larger Be content (53 at.% Be, see Fig. A-1b). At this composition the Be-Se signal shows up most 
strongly and, moreover, the two Be-Se sub-mode exhibit comparable Raman intensities (see below), 
giving rise to an unequally well-resolved Be-Se doublet. Most of all, the latter sample (53 at.% Be), 
together with the remaining one (33 at.% Be), are presumably well-suited to address the TO-like 
collapse regime and the LO-like reinforcement one of the . mode, respectively, as discussed 
above. The three ingots were prepared with parallel (within less than 1°) rear and front (01&1)-
oriented faces, polished to optical quality. We recall that at normal incidence onto such crystal faces 
the TO modes are allowed and the LO modes are forbidden, whether using the standard 
backscattering geometry (!~180°, for detection of the purely-mechanical TO’s) or the less common 
near-forward (!~0°, giving access to the PP’s) one.  
The near-forward Raman selection rules were realized by focusing the incident laser beam at 
near-normal incidence onto the rear crystal face using a lens with large focal length (so as to 
minimize the angular spread of the incident laser beam, for better definition of ") and by collecting 
the scattered light from the front crystal face in the same direction at large distance (for better 
definition of "). Two half-wave plates were placed on each side of the sample with their neutral axis 
taken either parallel to each other or rotated by 45°, corresponding to crossed (⊥) and parallel (∥) 
polarizations of the incident laser beam ()) and of the scattered light ()) at the sample surface, 
respectively. For each configuration (⊥ or ∥) the half-wave plates were turned as rigid bodies over 
180° with a quasi constant step of 10° so as to complete full rotations of ) and ) (over 360°) at the 
sample surface. The angle between ) and the [1&11] axis of the rear and front crystal faces, taken as 
an arbitrary reference, is referred to as the azimuth angle hereafter, denoted *. At each * value the 
scattered light was analyzed parallel to the entrance slit of the spectrometer, i.e. with a fixed 
sensitivity of the spectrometer – the maximum one in fact, so that the *-dependent Raman 
intensities are directly comparable.19  
The Raman spectra were taken with the low-energy 633.0 nm (red) and 785.0 nm (near-
infrared) laser lines from a HeNe laser and from a laser diode, respectively. Note that the latter 
operates at the detection limit of our Raman spectrometer, blazed for the visible. No appreciable 
heating effect was detected in spite of the used illumination of ∼50 mW, owing to large impact spot 
of the focused laser beam (∼20 +m in diameter – recall the large focal length) resulting in a small 
power density at the sample surface (∼10 mW/cm2). 
 
III. 
Results and discussion 
 
1. Theoretical insight 
 
Prior to the experimental study, we test theoretically the presumed suitability of the selected 
large (53 at.%) and moderate (33 at.%) Be contents to address the TO-like collapse regime and the 
LO-like reinforcement one of the . mode in Zn1-xBexSe, respectively, depending on the exciting 
laser line. For doing so we use our generic ( , )-dependent multi-PP (-=3 in total) Raman cross 
section (RCS, see, e.g., Ref. 16), which we recall below for clarity, 
./0(	, ,  )~34 5−6(	,  ) −7 × 
7 × 	789 × :1 + ∑/=( ) × >=(	,  )
=
?
7 + ∑/=7( ) ×
=
	,=
7 ( ) × >=(	,  ) × 0=9( ) × ∞,=
9 × 	,=
7 @.  
 
 
 
 
 
(1)6 
 
>=(	,  ) = 	,=
7 ( ) × A	,=
7 ( ) −	7 −B × C=( ) × 	D
9 
represents 
a 
damped 
Lorentzian 
resonance at the 	,=( ) frequency of the purely-mechanical --type TO mode. (	,  ) is the 
relative dielectric function of Zn1-xBexSe, expressed in its classical form, i.e. ∞( ) + ∑ ∞,= ×
=
0=( ) × >=(	,  =), assuming a linear variation of ∞( ). 0=( ) and /=( ) are, correspondingly, the 
oscillator strength and the Faust-Henry coefficient awarded to oscillator -. These monitor the Raman 
intensity of the p-type purely-mechanical TO mode and the splitting [in reference to 0=( )] together 
with the Raman intensity ratio between the latter and its LO counterpart [in reference to /=( )]. 
Both 0=( ) and /=( ) scale linearly with the fraction of oscillator -, i.e. as (1-x) and (x) for the unique 
Zn-Se oscillator and for the lower and upper Be-Se sub-oscillators taken together, respectively. The 
available BeSe-like oscillator strength further shares between the latter two in proportion to the 
fractions of the corresponding Be-like (x) and Zn-like (1-x) environments.14 The related Faust-Henry 
coefficients scale accordingly. With this, the Raman intensities of the two BeSe-like purely-
mechanical TO modes of Zn0.47Be0.53Se and Zn0.67Be0.33Se, noted EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 hereafter, are 
expected to scale roughly in the ratios 1:1 and 1:2, respectively, as actually observed in their 
reference Raman spectra taken in the backscattering geometry (see below). In the used notation the 
subscript and the superscript refer to the considered bond and to its local environment, respectively. 
Additional “alloy”-related input parameters are the three [1×(Zn-Se),2×(Be-Se)] 	,=( ) Raman 
frequencies measured in the backscattering geometry, namely (224, 447, 487) and (215, 420, 466) in 
cm-1, respectively, with corresponding phonon dampings C=( ) of (23, 36, 37) and (23, 38, 38), also 
given in cm-1. Parent-related input parameters are also needed, in reference to the (∞, /, 	, 	) 
values, corresponding to (5.75, -0.7, 205 cm-1, 254.5 cm-1) for ZnSe and (5.32, -0.7, 450 cm-1, 501 
cm-1) for BeSe.14  
By solving numerically the characteristic dispersion of a TO mode (a PP one as well as the 
corresponding purely-mechanical TO one), as derived from Maxwell’s equations, namely (	,  ) =
7 × 
7 × 	7, which leads to the divergence of the term within brackets in Eq. 1, one accesses the 
theoretical ‘	 vs. ’ PP dispersion of the considered Zn1-xBexSe mixed crystal. The as-obtained PP 
dispersion curves for Zn0.47Be0.53Se and Zn0.67Be0.33Se are displayed in Figs. 1a and 1b (thin lines), 
respectively, with an emphasis on the . (and K) mode(s) as the main interest in this 
work. For more convenience we substitute for  the dimensionless parameter L =  × 
 × 	9
9, in 
which 	9 arbitrarily refers to the frequency of the purely-mechanical EFJIH mode. Useful 
asymptotic transverse frequencies are those of the purely-mechanical (EFJIH, EFGHIH
GH
,EFGHIH
J
) 
modes ( →∞) and related (>FJIH, >FGHIH

,>FGHIH

) ones ( →0). 
An interesting question is how far one can descend the theoretical . (and also .) 
‘S-like’ dispersion(s) towards Γ by near-forward Raman scattering with a given laser excitation? Such 
laser-dependent limits are identified by superimposing the theoretical PP dispersions onto the 
experimentally achievable ‘	 vs. ’ ones given by the wave vector conservation law governing the 
Raman scattering process (quasi-linear/oblique dashed lines in Fig. 1), i.e. 
 = 
9 ∙PQ7(	,  )	
7 + Q7(	,  )	7 −2Q(	,  )Q(	,  )		
ST!U
V
W,  
 
 
(2) 
taken in the limiting case of perfect forward scattering (! = 0°). We recall that by enlarging ! to a 
finite value one retreats away from Γ, whichever laser line or/and alloy composition are used 
(examples are given below). The dependence on the exciting laser line is contained in the n(ωi,x) and 
n(ωs,x) values, representing the Zn1-xBexSe refractive indexes at the frequencies of the incident laser 
beam (ωi) and of the scattered lights (ωs). The wavelength (Y) dependencies in the visible spectral 
range of the refractive indexes of our two Zn1-xBexSe crystals, measured by ellipsometry, were7 
 
accurately fitted to the Cauchy dispersion formula Q (Y) = Z + [×λ2×104 + \×λ-4×109, using (Z,[,\) 
values of (2.3767 m 0.0015, 2.0873 m 0.0792, 3.1818 m 0.0916) for x=0.53 and of (2.4187 m 0.0003, 
2.2111 m 0.0225, 4.9053 m 0.0317) for x=0.33, where Z  is dimensionless, [ and \ are constants with 
units of nm2 and nm4, respectively, and Y is in nm. 
The as-obtained . (and also .) limits for Zn0.47Be0.63Se and Zn0.67Be0.33Se for various 
laser lines at hand, i.e. not only the presumably best-suited near-infrared (NIR, 785.0 nm) and red (R, 
633.0 nm) ones, as discussed above, but also the more energetic green (G, 514.5 nm) and blue (B, 
488.0 nm) ones from an Ar+ laser, also considered for the sake of completeness, are indicated by 
filled (open) symbols in Fig. 1. As expected (see Sec. II), less energetic laser lines penetrate deeper 
downward the . dispersion towards Γ. Nevertheless, in either crystal the experimental insight 
hardly gets beyond the first half of the . dispersion, meaning that the very close neighborhood 
of Γ remains out of reach. 
The next question is whether such moderate penetration suffices to achieve the LO-like 
reinforcement regime beyond the TO-like collapse one, or not? For a direct insight we complete our 
theoretical insight in Fig. 1 by adding the ./0(	, ! = 0°,  ) PP Raman lineshapes corresponding to 
the above identified limits (thin lines). The calculations were done by using a variant of Eq. 1 in which 
! (taken equal to 0°) substitutes for (, L) along the univocal correspondence given by Eq. 2. The 
native purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 ./0(	, ! = 180°,  ) Raman lineshapes 
(emphasized in grey) and related >FGHIH

 and >FGHIH

 ./0(	,  = 0,  ) Raman lineshapes (dashed 
lines) are also shown, for reference purpose. In any case a minimal phonon damping C=( ) of 1 cm-1 
is taken, for clarity. 
While the most energetic blue and green laser lines can only address the TO-like collapse 
regime in its early stage, the red excitation covers the latter regime in full, down to complete . 
extinction. However, the red line fails to enter frankly the LO-like reinforcement regime of our two 
mixed crystals (compare the theoretical Raman intensities of the . peak and of the 
corresponding native EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 features in Fig. 1 – thick lines). The only successful 
excitation with this respect is the near-infrared (785.0 nm) one, thereby emerging as the most 
relevant laser line in view of probing the Raman selection rules in the LO-like reinforcement regime. 
 
2. Raman selection rules in the near-forward scattering geometry 
 
We display in Fig. 2 the unpolarized TO-like Raman spectra of our three Zn1-xBexSe samples 
taken in the traditional backscattering geometry (corresponding to the theoretical peaks emphasized 
in grey in Fig. 1) using the 633.0 nm laser line, for reference purpose. We recall that in the 
backscattering geometry, one falls deep into the asymptotic regime of purely-mechanical (EFJIH, 
EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) modes. The corresponding frequencies, which are not dependent on the used 
laser line, occur near 210 cm-1, 425 cm-1, 500 cm-1, with slight variations depending on the Be content 
– (see Sec. III-1). The purely-mechanical TO’s are flanked on their high frequency side, i.e. around 240 
cm-1, 430 cm-1 (not observed14), 525 cm-1, by their (>FJIH, >FGHIH

, >FGHIH

) counterparts. These 
LO “shadows” are theoretically forbidden, but activated as minor peaks due to a disorder-induced 
breaking of the wave vector conservation law, a common feature in mixed crystals. Alternative 
peaks/bands (notably visible at ∼200 and ∼325 cm-1) reflect maxima in the one-phonon (disorder-
activated) and two-phonon (allowed) density of states involving the transverse (TA) and/or 
longitudinal (LA) acoustical modes. Among these modes, notably the so-called X mode, that emerges 
roughly halfway the Zn-Se and Be-Se spectral ranges, plays an important role in the following8 
 
discussion. Based on recent measurements of the Zn0.67Be0.33Se phonon dispersion by inelastic 
neutron scattering, and on related ab initio calculations,20 the X mode is tentatively identified as the 
two-phonon TA+LA band from the X zone-edge.  
In anticipation of the forecoming discussion of the near-forward Raman spectra, we mention 
that, somewhat surprisingly, the purely-mechanical (EFJIH, EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) modes remain 
visible in the latter Raman spectra (see below), while, in principle, they should have been replaced by 
their PP variants. The reason is that the Zn1-xBexSe mixed crystals exhibit large optical band gaps, 
inherited from their parent ZnSe (2.5 eV) and BeSe (5.5 eV) compounds.21 As such, they are 
transparent to the exciting (visible) laser beam, which, therefore, undergoes multi-reflection 
between the rear and front crystal faces. In particular, the multi-reflection magnifies the LO modes, 
especially at near-normal incidence (!∼0°).3 More important, on its way back to the rear face, the 
laser beam generates a spurious backscattering signal which superimposes with the nominal PP one 
created by the laser beam on its way forth to the front face. In fact, the spurious BeSe-like 
backscattering signal totally screens the . mode which falls into the EFGHIH
GH
− EFGHIH
J
 band. 
Such problem does not arise for the . mode, of central interest in this work, since the latter 
progressively shifts away from the native (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) modes when ! reduces.  
Our concern in the following is to identify possible . candidates on which to realize the 
Raman selection rules in both the collapse and reinforcement regimes. 
In Ref. 14 (see Fig. 4) the TO-like collapse regime of the . mode of Zn0.47Be0.53Se could be 
sequenced into a detailed series of spectra corresponding to various scattering angles by using the 
red (633.0 nm) laser line, until quasi . extinction at ultimately small angle (!∼0°). From the data 
reported there, the most suitable scattering angle for the planned near-forward Raman selection 
rules in the present work appears to be a small but finite one around 0.8°. At this limit, the . 
mode is probed approximately halfway to its collapse regime (at ∼400 cm-1), where it remains 
reasonably strong and at the same time well separated from both the spurious BeSe-like 
backscattering signal and the X band. A direct insight is given in Fig. 2 (the truncated near-forward 
BeSe-like Raman signal is shifted beneath the raw backscattering-like spectrum). Such . mode is 
ideal for reliable contour modeling and subsequent quantitative analysis of the . Raman 
intensity depending on the azimuth angle * in a given polarization setup (⊥ or ∥) in the collapse 
regime. 
Contrary to expectations (referring to Fig. 1a), when using the 785.0 nm laser line, we failed 
to observe the . mode of Zn0.47Be0.53Se in its LO-like reinforcement regime. We attribute this to 
the X band at ~325 cm-1 being too broad. The frequency domain that the latter covers extends up to 
350 cm-1, and thus partly overlaps onto the spectral range in which the LO-like reinforcement regime 
in this mixed crystal starts (see Fig. 1a). Our view is that as soon as the zone-centre . mode 
enters its LO-like reinforcement regime, it resonantly decomposes into two zone-edge modes with 
opposite wave vectors from the X band (so as to comply with the wave vector conservation law), and 
thus disappears. 
With respect to the X mode, Zn0.67Be0.33Se is more attractive than Zn0.47Be0.53Se. Indeed, its X 
band appears at a lower frequency (~300 cm-1, see Fig. 1b) and, furthermore, the LO-like regime of 
its . mode starts at a higher frequency (~390 cm-1, see Fig. 1b). Such ‘detuning’ eliminates the 
risk of a decomposition of the native reinforced . mode into the X band. In fact, the reinforced 
. mode of Zn0.67Be0.33Se was successfully detected with the 785.0 nm laser line. At ultimately 
small scattering angle (!∼0°), we obtain a well-resolved . feature (shifted beneath the9 
 
backscattering-like Raman signal in Fig. 2), emerging strong and sharp at intermediary distance 
between the X band and the spurious purely-mechanical (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) modes. The latter 
. feature is a choice candidate for realizing the Raman selection rules in the reinforcement 
regime. 
The integrated Raman intensities of the above two selected . modes in the collapse 
regime of Zn0.47Be0.53Se and in the reinforcement regime of Zn0.67Be0.33Se were estimated via a careful 
contour modeling using Lorentzian/Gaussian functions (examples are given in Fig. 2, emphasized in 
light grey) in their dependence on the azimuth angle *, in crossed (⊥, open symbols) and parallel (∥, 
filled symbols) polarizations at the same sample spot. The resulting patterns, with characteristic 
greek-cross-like (⊥) and butterfly-like (∥) shapes, are shown in Figs. 3a and 3b, respectively. In these 
figures, the data were normalized to the area of the most intense . peak out of the ⊥-type *-
series, arbitrarily taken as a reference. Quasi perfect redundancy is achieved over a complete 
* −revolution (over 360°, refer to the arrows) indicating that the laser power is stable.  
The experimental greek-cross-like (⊥) and butterfly-like (∥) patterns compare fairly well with 
the corresponding theoretical ones (⊥-thin and ∥-thick lines) calculated by expressing the Raman 
tensors of our zincblende crystals in the relevant {
9
√7[01&1], 
9
√^ 62118,
9
√_ [1&11]} basis for a near-normal 
incidence onto the (01&1) crystal face. We conclude that the . mode, whether taken in its TO-like 
collapse regime or in its LO-like reinforcement one, obeys the same nominal Raman selection rules as 
observed in the traditional backscattering geometry with the native purely-mechanical TO modes 
(see Fig. A1, Appendix Section). This must not be surprising since a, the relative displacement of the 
cationic and anionic species characteristic of an optic mode, as well as its accompanying electrical 
field , which, taken together, govern the Raman scattering due to purely-mechanical TO’s (a), PP’s 
[a,()] and LO’s (a,), do both consist of first-rank tensors (vectors). The Raman tensors, which 
reveal the modulation of the electronic susceptibility by a and/or by , thus keep the same form for 
all these (see, e.g., Ref. 3, p. 380), with concomitant impact on the Raman selection rules. 
 
3. Different . Raman lineshapes in the reinforcement and collapse regimes 
 
Though not of direct use for the above . symmetry analysis – the main issue in this work 
– we cannot escape a brief discussion of two intriguing features related to the . mode of 
Zn0.67Be0.33Se we used to perform the Raman selection rules in the reinforcement regime. As 
apparent from Fig. 2, the . mode shows up at a lower frequency (by as much as b∼17 cm-1) and 
is more narrow (roughly by a factor three, referring to the full width at half maximum – FWHM – of 
the Raman line), than the corresponding theoretical . Raman signal (thin curve) calculated via 
Eq. 1 (at !∼0° for the 785.0 nm laser line) on the basis of the nominal two-mode (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) 
description of the native BeSe-like purely-mechanical TO’s (thick curves). In particular, the frequency 
aspect is difficult to conceive since, for a given laser excitation, there is no experimental means to 
further reduce the  value, and hence the . frequency, once the ultimate ! = 0° scattering 
angle has been reached. A further intriguing feature is that the frequency and linewidth . 
anomalies are absent in the collapse regime, as discussed below.10 
 
3a. Experimental insight 
 
For a direct insight into how do the above frequency and linewidth anomalies develop as  
reduces, we display in Fig. 4 an extended series of near-forward Raman spectra taken with 
Zn0.67Be0.33Se at various scattering angles using the 785.0 nm laser line. The corresponding frequency 
(	) dependencies of both the FWHM (triangles) and the Raman intensity (3c, integrated over the 
area of the peak, circles) are displayed in Fig. 5. Such quantities were measured from careful 
Lorentzian-like contour modeling (thin curves) of the . peaks (shifted beneath the experimental 
curves in Fig. 4) obtained after subtraction of the spurious backscattering-like signal (referring to the 
spectrum corresponding to full extinction of the . mode, marked by an open square in Fig. 4) 
from the raw Raman data (thick curves). Last, before common exposure in Fig. 5, the FWHM and 3c 
values were normalized to the corresponding ones of the native purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 mode 
(Fig. 2), taken as a reference. The theoretical ‘3c vs. 	’ dependence calculated on the basis of the 
nominal two-mode (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) description of the native BeSe-like purely-mechanical TO’s is 
added for comparison, down to the lowest accessible limit with the laser line used (! = 0°, 785 nm).  
In principle, for each reported (3c,	) couple of experimental data, the scattering angle ! can 
be inferred either from the Raman frequency (	) or from the Raman intensity (3c), or, ideally, from 
both. This is done by computing Eq. 1 after substitution of ! for (,L) along Eq. 2, and by adjusting ! 
until perfect agreement is achieved between the experimental and theoretical . signals for the 
selected marker(s) (in reference to 3c or/and 	). However, in the present case ‘	’ is manifestly not a 
reliable marker, in that, in Fig. 5, most of the measured Raman frequencies are massively red-shifted 
away from the theoretically accessible frequency domain by as much as ~17 cm-1. Accordingly the 
reported ! values in Fig. 5 were derived from a selective insight into 3c. Remarkably, the massive red 
shift is accompanied by a significant reduction in the FWHM with respect to the purely-mechanical 
TO’s, by factor of four at ultimately small scattering angle.  
In fact, the only ‘decent’ . feature with respect to the theoretical ‘3c vs. 	’ two-mode 
(Be-Se) prediction is the first one of the series, taken at large scattering angle. Interestingly, its 3c and 
	 values consistently indicate that it falls at the limit of the collapse regime, very close to the 
borderline with the reinforcement regime (identifying with the minimum of the theoretical ‘3c vs. 	’ 
curve). The latter . peak is further interesting in that its linewidth matches that of its native 
purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes within less than ten percent (~3 cm-1). Altogether, 
such data suggest that the frequency and linewidth anomalies observed with all the remaining . 
modes of the series, taken at smaller scattering angles and thus coming under the reinforcement 
regime, are absent in the collapse regime. 
However, only one . peak of Zn0.67Be0.33Se, moreover a small one close to extinction, is 
not sufficient to formulate a statement valid throughout the entire collapse regime. For a fully 
reliable insight into the collapse regime we turn to Zn0.47Be0.53Se, in relation to the abundant data 
earlier published in Ref. 14 (Fig. 4 therein). Remarkably the theoretical . Raman lineshapes 
calculated via Eq. 1 on the basis of the bimodal pattern of the native purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and 
EFGHIH
J
 modes (thin lines in Fig. 4 of Ref. 14) reproduce fairly well the experimental . features 
at any scattering angle, in what regards both the Raman frequency (	) and intensity (3c). The used 
implicit approximation that the FWHM of the . mode remains identical to that of the native 
purely-mechanical TO’s throughout the entire collapse regime is thus a valid one. For a direct insight, 
compare, e.g., the FWHM’s of the . (light grey), EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 (dark grey) Raman lines11 
 
of Zn0.47Be0.53Se in Fig. 3a, obtained after contour modeling using Lorentzian/Gaussian functions. 
Altogether this is consistent with the Zn0.67Be0.33Se insight in this work.  
Summarizing, the available Zn0.67Be0.33Se and Zn0.47Be0.53Se Raman data reveal that the 
apparent frequency and linewidth anomalies of the . mode come along, and appear only in the 
reinforcement regime, not in the collapse regime.  
 
3b. The . mode in its reinforcement regime: striking analogies with the LO mode 
 
Remarkably, the frequency and linewidth anomalies observed in the transverse symmetry 
with the . mode of Zn0.67Be0.33Se in its reinforcement regime are echoed in the longitudinal 
symmetry with the >FGHIH

 mode of both the Zn0.67Be0.33Se and Zn0.47Be0.53Se mixed crystals. 
Moreover the magnitudes of both anomalies are comparable in both symmetries (refer to the 
frequency- and linewidth-related double arrows in Fig. 2). This cannot be merely fortuitous, and 
points towards a common cause. Only, the LO shift occurs towards high frequency (blue-shift), and 
not towards low frequency (red-shift) as for the . mode. 
Such anomalies of the >FGHIH

 signal of Zn1-xBexSe have been studied in detail one decade 
ago.23 They were attributed to a discrete (and not continuous) fine structure behind the native 
EFGHIH
GH
−EFGHIH
J
 doublet of purely-mechanical TO’s. The fine structure in question results from 
inherent fluctuations in the local composition of a disordered mixed crystal, leading in fine to slight 
variations of the Be-Se vibration frequencies throughout the crystal. Independent support arises 
from recent ab initio calculation of the Γ −projected one-phonon density of states related to the Be 
atoms in a large Zn64Be32Se96 disordered supercell (33 at.% Be). The latter appears to be extremely 
broad, expanding over ~50 cm-1, and clearly multimodal in character (in contrast the Zn counterpart 
hardly covers ~10 cm-1, and apparently consists of a unique feature - see Fig. 4 of Ref. 20). Owing to 
their purely-mechanical character, the individual sub-oscillators from the fine structure do hardly 
couple and thus contribute on equal footing to the overall signal, that is the reason why the two 
main EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 Raman features detected in the backscattering geometry are so broad 
(C=~37 cm-1, see Sec. III-1). 
Now, the situation changes in the LO symmetry. The sub-oscillators from the fine structure 
are then accompanied by a common macroscopic longitudinal electrical field  (a constant one, see 
Sec. I) via which they strongly couple. Generally, the effect of the -coupling is to channel the BeSe-
like oscillator strength shared among various sub-oscillators of the fine structure towards a unique 
LO sub-mode emerging as a ‘giant’ one. The as-favored sub-LO mode is shifted to high frequency 
with respect to the remaining sub-LO’s, now deprived of oscillator strength and thus repelled as 
minor features close to their native purely-mechanical sub-TO’s. Moreover, as the ‘giant’ LO mode 
basically consists of a unique oscillator, it is sharper (referring to the FWHM) than its native purely-
mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes, which both exhibit a fine-structure (compare the FWHM of 
the corresponding Lorentzian/Gaussian-like profiles shown for Zn0.67Be0.33Se in Fig. 2). 
In principle, the above >FGHIH

 picture transposes as such to the corresponding . mode 
in the transverse symmetry, also equipped with a macroscopic electrical field, however, a -
dependent one in this case (Sec. I), denoted (). One basic difference nevertheless is that the 
()-coupling tends to channel the oscillator strength towards low frequency, oppositely to the -
coupling, as studied in detail in Ref. 16.12 
 
In fact, the analogy between the >FGHIH

 and . modes is valid in the reinforcement 
regime of the latter – in what regards both the frequency and linewidth anomalies (refer to the 
Lorentzian/Gaussian-like line contour modeling displayed for the BeSe-like signal of Zn0.47Be0.53Se in 
Fig. 2), but not in the collapse regime. Indeed, in the latter regime the FWHM of the . mode 
remains identical to that of its native purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes (see Sec. 3a, 
and also Fig. 2 – Zn0.47Be0.53Se). This indicates, in particular, the absence of any intra-mode ()-
mediated transfer of oscillator strength. Yet, an actual fine structure exists behind the purely-
mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes, as ascertained by the frequency and linewidth anomalies 
of the >FGHIH

 Raman signal (see the double arrows to the LO mode of Zn0.47Be0.53Se in Fig. 2). 
We are thus led to conclude that the ()-coupling is  −dependent. Somehow this 
conforms to intuition since , the vector of coupling, is itself  −dependent (in contrast with ).  In 
a nutshell, the coupling is strong in the reinforcement regime and inoperative in the collapse regime. 
A weak coupling in the collapse regime is not surprising since, in the latter regime, () 
progressively departs from zero (referring to the purely-mechanical TO modes away from Γ). The 
reason why the ()-coupling becomes operative precisely when entering the reinforcement 
regime is not clear yet. 
 
3c. Crude theoretical insight 
 
We must admit that we have no means to infer neither the number nor the frequencies of 
the sub-oscillators constituting the presumed fine structure behind the two BeSe-like purely 
mechanical (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) modes of Zn0.67Be0.33Se. The amount of Be-Se oscillator strength 
awarded per sub-oscillator is likewise not accessible. For a crude quantitative insight, we artificially 
substitute for the apparent bimodal description (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) of the purely-mechanical BeSe-
like signal, an equivalent multi-mode description arbitrarily limited to ten sub-oscillators (plain line), 
in which the oscillator strength carried by each sub-mode of the doublet is shared among five 
equally-spaced (by ∼14 cm-1) sub-oscillators (awarding 32% of the oscillator strength to the central 
oscillator, 22% to each of its side oscillators, and 12% to each of the remaining two peripheral 
oscillators). A minimal phonon damping (1 cm-1) is taken, for clarity. The crude two-oscillator (thick 
lines) and refined ten-oscillator (thin lines) ., purely-mechanical TO and LO theoretical 
Zn0.67Be0.33Se Raman lineshapes calculated by implementing Eq. 1 in full at the relevant  value (by 
assuming the normal incidence, i.e. ! = 0°, for the used 785.0 nm laser line), in the  ≫
f
g 
approximation and strictly at  = 0 (recall the TO-LO degeneracy at Γ), respectively, are displayed in 
Fig. 4. As expected, the ten-oscillator description eventually leads to the emergence of sharp >F 
and . Raman peaks, respectively blue- and red-shifted with respect to their broad two-oscillator 
counterparts (refer to the double-arrows in Figs. 2 and 4). 
In brief, the observed frequency and linewidth anomalies of the polar ( −equipped) 
>FGHIH

 mode and . mode (in its reinforcement regime) of Zn0.67Be0.33Se find a natural 
explanation by assuming that their native broad purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes are 
finely structured due to the alloy disorder. In this case the -coupling between the individual sub-
modes gives rise to an intra-mode -mediated transfer of oscillator strength on top of the classical 
inter-mode (EFGHIH
GH
→EFGHIH
J
) one. Altogether, this results in both a drastic sharpening and an13 
 
emphasized shift, towards low (.) or high (>FGHIH

) frequency, with respect to the native 
purely-mechanical EFGHIH
GH
 and EFGHIH
J
 modes.  
Technically, we have no flexibility to explore the effect of a weak -mediated coupling 
between the individual sub-oscillators, in reference to the . mode in its collapse regime. In our 
simulations, the  −coupling is either present (incorporated via a Coulombian force in the ionic 
equation of motion, as required for the >F and . modes), or absent (as relevant for the 
description of the purely-mechanical TO’s, the Coulombian interaction being then omitted in the 
force assessment), with no possible modulation of . 
For the sake of completeness, we report in the Appendix Section (Sec. A-2) a discussion of 
remarkable differences and analogies between the frequency and linewidth anomalies of the  -
equipped >F and . modes from the two ZnSe-based Zn0.67Be0.32Se (this work) and ZnSe0.68S0.32 
(Refs. 24 and 15) mixed crystals, characterized by similar contents of their short (Be-Se, Zn-S) bond 
species. 
 
IV. 
Conclusion 
 
We perform the near-forward Raman selection rules of the . mode created by 
“alloying” in the three-mode [1x(Zn-Se),2x(Be-Se)] Zn1-xBexSe system, using parallel and crossed 
polarizations. We find that the . mode keeps the nominal TO symmetry as apparent in the 
standard backscattering geometry throughout the whole of its characteristic S-like dispersion, i.e. not 
only in its TO-like collapse regime away from Γ but also in its LO-like reinforcement regime near Γ.  
Optimal Raman insight into a given PP regime is achieved by adjusting the Be content, the laser 
excitation and the PP wave vector (by playing with the scattering angle !), supported by contour 
modeling of the PP Raman lineshapes in their ( ,,!) dependencies within the linear dielectric 
approach. 
Remarkably, both optic vibrations that are equipped with an electrical field , namely the 
transverse . one as well as the longitudinal >F one, are significantly shifted (in opposite 
directions) and sharpened with respect to the corresponding theoretical Raman signals issued from 
the nominal two-mode description of the native purely-mechanical BeSe-like TO’s. This reveals a 
disorder-induced fine structure behind the latter, leading, on top of the “classical” inter-mode 
 −mediated transfer of oscillator strength, to an intra-mode one. With this, a unique sub-oscillator 
is favored out of the PP and LO series and pronounced as a giant one, both sharpened and 
overshifted with respect to the rest of the series. As far as the . mode is concerned, the 
overshift and drastic sharpening are detected only in the reinforcement regime, the sign that  is 
fully developed at this limit, and not in the collapse regime, where  is only progressively departing 
from zero and remains weak/inoperative, notably in what regards the intra-mode transfer of 
oscillator strength. Altogether this provides an insight into how the photon-like transverse electrical 
field  of a TO mode develops when departing from the purely-mechanical ( = 0) asymptotic 
regime away from Γ, and entering the PP regime ( ≠0) near Γ, including the collapse ( weak)  and 
reinforcement ( strong) sub-regimes.14 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We would like to thank P. Franchetti and J.-P. Decruppe for technical assistance in the Raman 
measurements, and A. V. Postnikov for useful discussions and careful reading of the manuscript.15 
 
Appendix Section 
 
 
In this Sec. we cover two distinct issues. In Sec. A-1 we provide a reference insight into the 
Zn1-xBexSe Raman selection rules in the traditional backscattering geometry, in relation to the purely-
mechanical TO modes.  In Sec. A-2 we discuss to which extent the frequency and linewidth anomalies 
of the >F and . (in the reinforcement regime) modes related to the short bond of 
Zn0.67Be0.32Se resemble and/or differ from those of ZnSe0.68S0.32, earlier studied in Ref. 15. The 
fractions of the short bond species (Be-Se or Zn-S) are nearly the same in the two mixed crystals, so 
that the related Raman signals can be directly compared. 
 
A1. Zn1-xBexSe: Symmetry analysis of the purely-mechanical TO’s in the backscattering Raman 
geometry 
 
We report in Fig. A1a and A1b the Raman selection rules performed in the backscattering 
geometry with the purely-mechanical EFJIH mode and with the like (EFGHIH
GH
, EFGHIH
J
) doublet 
(b) of Zn0.88Be0.12Se and Zn0.47Be0.53Se, respectively, using the 633.0 nm laser line. The latter crystals 
correspond to large Zn content and maximum Be content, respectively, and are thus well suited for 
such reference Zn-Se and Be-Se insights. The Raman intensities were measured in their angular (*, 
see main text) dependence in a given polarization setup (⊥ or ∥)  via a careful contour modeling using 
Lorentzian/Gaussian functions (refer to the dark grey features in Fig. 2). The Be-Se contour modeling 
was performed directly on the raw spectra owing to the naturally well-defined baseline in this 
spectral range. In contrast, the EFJIH mode is contaminated by numerous disorder-induced 
features, so that the subtraction of a tentative baseline (refer to the dotted curve in Fig. 2) was 
required before Lorentzian-like adjustment.  
The experimental data basically conform the theoretical predictions (plain curves, see main 
text), in both the ⊥ (greek-cross-like, theory – thin lines, exp. – open symbols) and ∥ (butterfly-like, 
theory – thick lines, exp. – plain symbols) polarization setups. In fact, the agreement is nearly perfect 
in the case of Be-Se, with EFGHIH
GH
 (circles) as well as with EFGHIH
J
 (squares). Similar butterfly- and 
greek-cross-like patterns are also observed with EFJIH, but the agreement between theory and 
experiment is not so good, especially when the EFJIH mode is close to extinction. This is due to 
the above mentioned contamination problem, which prevents a reliable determination of the Raman 
intensity at critical * angles. 
The as-obtained Raman selection rules for the purely-mechanical EFJIH,  EFGHIH
GH
 and 
EFGHIH
J
 modes ( = 0) of Zn1-xBexSe achieved in the backscattering geometry constitute natural 
references for the given discussion, in the main part of the manuscript (Sec. III-2), of the like . 
( −equipped) Raman selection rules done in the collapse and reinforcement regimes by near-
forward scattering. 
 
A2. Zn1-xBexSe vs. ZnS1-xSx : comparative insight into the . and >F anomalies 
  
Interestingly, the . mode of the ZnSe0.68S0.32 mixed crystal exhibits a significant reduction 
in FWHM (referred to as the “linewidth anomaly” in the main text) when entering the reinforcement 
regime, as observed with Zn0.67Be0.33Se. However, the overshift with respect to the two-mode 
prediction (referred to as the “frequency anomaly” in the main text) is absent in the case of 
ZnSe0.68S0.32, in contrast to Zn0.67Be0.33Se. In fact, the experimental ‘3c vs. 	’ ZnSe0.68S0.32 data fairly16 
 
match the theoretical prediction done on the basis a mere bimodal behavior of the purely-
mechanical (EFJI
I
, EFJI
IH
) doublet, down to ultimately small scattering angle (falling into the 
reinforcement regime, as with Zn0.67Be0.32Se). For a direct insight we reproduce in Fig. A2 the original 
‘3c vs. 	’ plot earlier obtained with ZnSe0.68S0.32 (taken from Fig. 6 of Ref. 15), now completed with 
the FWHM data.  
The comparison between Zn0.67Be0.33Se and Zn0.47Be0.53Se can be pursued in the longitudinal 
symmetry with the >F mode. As apparent in Fig. A3, the >F Raman peak of ZnSe0.68S0.32 is much 
more narrow than the native purely-mechanical EFJI
I
 and EFJI
IH
 modes (see, e.g. Fig. 7 of Ref. 
16), meaning that it exhibits the linewidth anomaly, as its . (in the reinforcement regime) 
counterpart. As for the frequency anomaly of >F, it is difficult to decide because it is not clear yet 
which oscillator strength should be used for pure ZnS when considering the ZnSe1-xSx mixed crystal, as 
pointed out by Vinogradov et al. in their careful study of this mixed crystal by far-infrared 
reflectivity.24 We only observe that the theoretical Zn-Se and Zn-S LO frequencies derived within the 
nominal three-mode [EFJIH, EFJI
I
, EFJI
IH
] description of the purely-mechanical TO’s (Fig. A3, 
plain curves) using the nominal oscillator strengths of the pure ZnSe (2.92) and ZnS (3.00) 
compounds,16 do match the experimental values (within 1 cm-1) – as expected, provided the ZnSe-like 
LO mode is decoupled from the BeSe-like one. When calculating the LO Raman lineshape due to a 
given bond via Eq. 1, the decoupling is achieved technically by removing the oscillators due to the 
other bond (dashed and dotted curves) from the relative dielectric function of the crystal, and 
leaving the rest unchanged. A possible justification for the decoupling between the Zn-Se and Zn-S LO 
signals is a pining of the former signal by the numerous disorder-activated features around, as 
abundantly discussed in Ref. 16. 
Summarizing, the >F and . modes of ZnSe0.68S0.32 are consistent in what regards the 
presence of the linewidth anomaly along with the absence of the frequency anomaly. For 
comparison, in Zn0.67Be0.33Se both anomalies occur for both modes. This reinforces the match 
between the linewidth and frequency anomalies of the polar (-equipped) >F and . (in the 
reinforcement regime) modes as a general feature in mixed crystals, at least in the ZnSe-based ones. 
Now, an interesting question is why the linewidth anomalies of the . (taken in the 
reinforcement regime) and >F modes are not accompanied by any frequency anomaly in the case 
of ZnSe0.68S0.32, whereas the two anomalies come along in the case of Zn0.67Be0.33Se? To our view this 
relates to a basic difference in the disorder-induced fine structures behind the purely-mechanical 
TO’s of the two mixed crystals. Zn1-xBexSe exhibits a unusually large contrast in bond length, roughly 
double that of ZnSe1-xSx (~9% against ~4.5%, see Ref. 16). One may thus expect larger variations in 
the local bond distortions of the Be-Se bonds throughout Zn0.67Be0.33Se than those occurring for Zn-S 
in ZnSe0.68S0.32. Consequently, the frequencies of the individual modes forming the fine structure of 
the Be-Se and Zn-S doublets of purely-mechanical TO’s are expected to be well separated for the 
former and rather close for the latter. In fact, the absence of any frequency anomaly points towards 
a quasi continuous fine structure for ZnSe0.68S0.32. In this case we have shown in recent work 
dedicated to the >F mode of Zn1-xBexSe23 that only the linewidth anomaly occurs, and not the 
frequency one, consistently with experimental observations with ZnSe0.68S0.32.  
It emerges that the existence/absence of a frequency anomaly for the polar (-equipped) 
>F and . (in the reinforcement regime) modes of Zn0.67Be0.32Se/ZnSe0.68S0.32 is subject to the 
discrete/continuous character of the disorder-induced fine structure behind the native purely-17 
 
mechanical TO’s ( = 0). In contrast, the reduction in FWHM of the latter modes occurs in any case, 
i.e. whether the fine structuring is discrete or continuous.18 
 
References 
 
1 M. Born and K. Huang, in Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices (Oxford University Press, Clarendon, 
1954), p. 89. 
2 P. M. A. Sherwood, in Vibrational Spectroscopy of Solids (Cambridge University Press, New York, 
1972), p. 98. 
3 P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, in Fundamentals of Semiconductors (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2010), p. 
292. 
4 N. S. Stoyanov et al., Nature Materials 1 (2002) 95. 
5 J. Geurts, Surf. Sci. Rep. 18 (1993) 1. 
6 C. H. Henry and J. J. Hopfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 15 (1965) 964. 
7 J. B. Valdez and S. Ushioda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38 (1977) 1098. 
8 D. L. Mills and E. Burstein, Rep. Prog. Phys. 37 (1974) 817. 
9 H. Poulet, in Spectres de Vibration et Symétrie des Cristaux (Gordon & Breach, New York, 1970), p. 
173. 
10 J. Bao and X. X. Liang, J. Phys.: Condes. Matter 18 (2006) 8229. 
11 C. L. Yan and J. Bao, Superlattices and Microstructures 74 (2014) 206. 
12 S. S. Ng, Z. Hassan and H. A. Hassan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 91 (2007) 081909. 
13 P. K. Ooi, S. C. Lee, S. S. Ng, Z. Hassan and H. Abu Hassan, Thin Solid Films 519 (2011) 5481. 
14 H. Dicko O. Pagès, R. Hajj Hussein, G.K. Pradhan, C. Narayana, F. Firszt, A. Marasek, W. Paszkowicz, 
A. Maillard, C. Jobard, L. Broch and F. El Hajj Hassan, J. Raman Spectrosc. To be published (DOI 
10.1002/jrs.4817). 
15 R. Hajj Hussein, O. Pagès, F. Firszt, A. Marasek, W. Paszkowicz, A. Maillard and L. Broch, J. Appl. 
Phys. 116 (2014) 083511. 
16 R. Hajj Hussein, O. Pagès, S. Doyen-Schuler, H. Dicko, A. V. Postnikov, F. Firszt, A. Marasek, W. 
Paszkowicz, A. Maillard, L. Broch and O. Gorochov, J. Alloys and Compounds 644 (2015) 704. 
17 G. Irmer, C. Röder, C. Himcinschi and J. Kortus, Phys. Rev. B 88 (2013) 104303. 
18 F. C. Peiris, U. Bindley, J. K. Furdyna, H. Kim, A. K. Ramdas and M. Grimsditch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79 
(2001) 473. 
19 W. Peng, F. Jabeen, B. Jusserand, J. C. Harmand and M. Bernard, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 (2012) 
073102. 
20 M. N. Rao, D. Lamago, A. Ivanov, M. d’Astuto, A. V. Postnikov, R. Hajj Hussein, T. Basak, S. L. 
Chaplot, F. Firszt, W. Paszkowicz, S.K. Deb and O. Pagès, Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014) 155201. 
21 C. Chauvet, E. Tournié and J.-P. Faurie, Phys. Rev. B 61 (2000) 5332. 
22 M. L. Shand, H. D. Hochheimer, M. Krauzman, J. E. Potts, R. C. Hanson and C. T. Walker, Phys. Rev. 
B 14 (1976) 4637. 
23 O. Pagès, M. Ajjoun, T. Tite, D. Bormann, E. Tournié and K. C. Rustagi, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004) 55319. 
24 E. A. Vinogradov, B. N. Mavrin, N. N. Novikova, V. A. Yakovlev, Phys. Sol. State 48 (2006) 1940.19 
 
Figure captions 
Fig. 1 : Theoretical Zn0.47Be0.53Se (a) and Zn0.67Be0.33Se (b) ‘	 vs. L’ PP dispersion curves (thin lines).  
The theoretical PP Raman lineshapes achievable experimentally in the perfect forward 
scattering geometry (! = 0°) by using the blue (B, 488.0 nm), green (G, 514.5 nm), red (R, 
633.0 nm) and near-infrared (NIR, 785.0 nm) laser lines, calculated via Eq. (1) by taking a small 
phonon damping (1 cm-1), are shown (thin curves), together with the corresponding purely-
mechanical TO (emphasized in grey) and LO (dashed curves) ones. The relevant (	, ) PP 
values for each laser line (symbols) are identified by coincidence (symbols) of the theoretical 
PP dispersion with the experimental ‘	 vs. L’ dispersion (dotted lines) dictated by the 
wavevector conservation law, referring to Eq. (2). The dependence of the . Raman 
intensity on the Raman frequency 	 is indicated (dashed-dotted lines). 
Fig. 2: Reference unpolarized Raman spectra taken in the traditional backscattering geometry 
(!~180°, TO-allowed, LO-forbidden) with the (01&1)-oriented Zn0.88Be0.12Se (bottom), 
Zn0.67Be0.33Se (medium) and Zn0.47Be0.53Se (top) samples, and corresponding near-forward 
Raman spectra (!~0°, truncated-thick curves shifted beneath the former spectra). The TO 
modes used to perform the Raman selection rules in the PP (light grey) and purely-mechanical 
(dark grey) regimes are emphasized. The . mode of Zn0.67Be0.33Se obtained after 
subtraction of the spurious backscattering signal is marked by a filled square (refer to Fig. 4). 
The theoretical BeSe-like purely-mechanical TO’s (thick lines), PP’s (thin lines) and LO’s (dashed 
lines) based on a two-mode description are shown, for comparison. 
Fig. 3: Raman selection rules in their angular (*, see main text) dependence performed in the near-
forward scattering geometry in crossed (⊥, Greekcross-like, open symbols) and parallel (∥, 
Butterfly-like, filled symbols) configurations with the . modes (distinguished in dark grey 
in Fig. 3) of Zn0.47Be0.53Se (a,) and Zn0.67Be0.33Se (b), characteristic of the collapse and 
reinforcement regimes, respectively. 
Fig. 4: Backward (top) and !-dependent near-forward Zn0.67Be0.33Se Raman spectra. The 
corresponding . (thin lines, bottom), purely-mechanical TO (thick lines, top) and LO (thin 
lines, top) theoretical Raman lineshapes, obtained on the basis of the bimodal (upper curves) 
and multi-mode (lower curves) descriptions of the purely-mechanical BeSe-like TO modes, are 
added for comparison. The experimental . Raman signals obtained after subtraction of 
the near-forward Raman spectrum corresponding to total extinction of the . mode 
(marked by an open square), are shifted beneath the raw data, for a clear insight.. 
Fig. 5: Frequency (	) dependencies of the FWHM (triangles) and Raman intensity (3c, circles) of the 
. mode of Zn0.67Be0.33Se. The theoretical ‘3c vs. 	’ curve based on a two-mode description 
of the Be-Se signal is added (thin line), for comparison. The scattering angle !, derived from a 
selective insight into 3c, is indicated in each case. The errors bars refer to the used procedure 
for contour modeling based on Lorentzian or Gaussian functions. 
Fig. A1: Raman selection rules in their angular (*, see main text) dependence performed in the 
backscattering geometry in crossed (⊥, Greekcross-like, open symbols) and parallel (∥, 
Butterfly-like, filled symbols) configurations with the purely mechanical EFJIH  mode of20 
 
Zn0.88Be0.12Se (a) and EFGHIH
GH
 (circles) and EFGHIH
J
 (diamonds) modes of   Zn0.47Be0.53Se (b), as 
emphasized in Fig. 2. 
Fig. A2: Frequency (	) dependencies of the FWHM (triangles) and Raman intensity (3c, circles) of the 
. mode of ZnSe0.68S0.32. The theoretical ‘3c vs. 	’ curve based on a two-mode descriptioin 
of the Zn-S signal is added (thin line), for comparison. The scattering angle !, derived from 
combined insights into the Raman frequency (	) and the Raman intensity (3c), is indicated in 
each case. The errors bars refer to the used procedure for contour modeling based on 
Lorentzian or Gaussian functions. 
Fig. A3: representative TO-like Raman spectrum of ZnSe0.68S0.32 taken in the backscattering geometry. 
The corresponding theoretical three-mode [EFJIH, EFJI
I
, EFJI
IH
] description of the 
purely-mechanical TO’s (plain curves) is superimposed, for comparison, together with the 
related ZnSe- (dashed curve) and BeSe-like (dotted curve) LO Raman lineshapes. The latter 
were calculated by assuming a disorder-induced decoupling between the Zn-Se and Be-Se 
signals.21 
 
 
 
Fig. 1a 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1b22 
 
 
 
Fig. 223 
 
 
 
Fig. 3a 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3b24 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 425 
 
 
 
Fig. 526 
 
 
 
Fig. A1a 
 
 
 
Fig. A1b27 
 
 
 
Fig. A228 
 
 
 
Fig. A3