1
Perovskite-Inspired Materials for Photovoltaics – From 
Design to Devices 
 
Yi-Teng Huang,1 Seán R. Kavanagh,2,3,4 David O. Scanlon,2,4,5 Aron Walsh,3,6 and Robert L. Z. 
Hoye3,* 
 
1Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge CB3 0HE, 
UK 
2Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H 
0AJ, UK 
3Department of Materials, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK 
4Thomas Young Centre, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK 
5Diamond Light Source Ltd., Diamond House, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, 
Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, UK 
6 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, South 
Korea 
 
* Corresponding author 
Email: r.hoye@imperial.ac.uk (R.L.Z.H.) 
 
Abstract 
Lead-halide perovskites have demonstrated astonishing increases in power conversion 
efficiency in photovoltaics over the last decade. The most efficient perovskite devices now 
outperform industry-standard multi-crystalline silicon solar cells, despite the fact that 
perovskites are typically grown at low temperature using simple solution-based methods. 
However, the toxicity of lead and its ready solubility in water are concerns for widespread 
implementation. These challenges, alongside the many successes of the perovskites, have 
motivated significant efforts across multiple disciplines to find lead-free and stable alternatives 
which could mimic the ability of the perovskites to achieve high performance with low 
temperature, facile fabrication methods. This Review discusses the computational and 
experimental approaches that have been taken to discover lead-free perovskite-inspired 
materials, and the recent successes and challenges in synthesizing these compounds. The 
atomistic origins of the extraordinary performance exhibited by lead-halide perovskites in 
photovoltaic devices is discussed, alongside the key challenges in engineering such high-
performance in alternative, next-generation materials. Beyond photovoltaics, this Review2
discusses the impact perovskite-inspired materials have had in spurring efforts to apply new 
materials in other optoelectronic applications, namely light-emitting diodes, photocatalysts, 
radiation detectors, thin film transistors and memristors. Finally, the prospects and key 
challenges faced by the field in advancing the development of perovskite-inspired materials 
towards realization in commercial devices is discussed. 
 
Keywords: Lead-halide perovskites, perovskite-inspired materials, materials discovery, 
chemical descriptors, selection metrics, photovoltaic efficiency, materials design, point 
defects, non-radiative recombination, transition levels, carrier capture, defect tolerance, defect 
calculations, defect formation energy, supercell approach, Density Functional Theory (DFT), 
plane-wave DFT, design principles, high-throughput screening, photovoltaics, nanocrystals, 
chemical vapor deposition, solution processing, physical vapor deposition, photovoltaics, light-
emitting diodes, photocatalysts, radiation detectors, thin film transistors, memristors 
 
1. Introduction 
Sunlight is a vast, reliable and ubiquitous source of renewable energy [1]. Each year, terrestrial 
solar energy amounts to 1500 exawatt-hours [2], whereas global electrical energy demand was 
only 0.03 exawatt-hours in 2018. Arguably the most promising method to convert solar energy 
to electricity with no carbon-based by-products is through photovoltaics (PVs) [1]. However, 
solar energy production only reached 440 terawatt-hours in 2018, with 500 gigawatts of PV 
capacity installed worldwide by the end of 2018 [1]. Although PV deployment is projected to 
soon reach the terawatt level [1], it is predicted that 37–180 TW of PV capacity would be 
needed by 2050 in order to fulfil the ambitions of over 60 nations to achieve net-zero carbon 
emissions [3].3
Numerous technoeconomic analyses have examined the challenges that must be addressed to 
enable the required scaling of PV capacity, some of which are covered in Ref. [1, 3, 4]. Notably, 
this will require reductions in the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) and capital-intensity of 
manufacturing [4], which could be achieved through the use of thin film solar cells, particularly 
in tandem devices. Tandem solar cells combine two sub-cells which absorb in complementary 
parts of the solar spectrum, thus surpassing the theoretical limit of a single-junction device. 
Thin film solar cells are also suitable for integration in buildings (e.g., solar windows), or use 
indoors to power small standalone gadgets, forming part of the Internet of Things [6]. 
 
While thin film PVs have been developed for decades, lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) have 
recently emerged, demonstrating higher device learning-rates than any other PV material [7]. 
Since their first report in PVs in 2009 (with 3.8% efficiency [8]), LHP PVs have now reached 
a certified efficiency of >25% [8] for small area cells, exceeding the efficiency of multi-
crystalline silicon and approaching the certified record efficiency of crystalline silicon solar 
cells (26.7% [9]). Tandems between LHP top-cells and silicon bottom-cells have already 
reached a certified efficiency of 29.1% after only 6 years of development [10, 11]. The LHP 
band gap can be easily tuned over a wide range through manipulation of the composition. As 
a result, perovskite-perovskite tandems have been realized, with 25% efficiency already 
achieved [11]. Both tandem structures are projected to achieve lower LCOEs than single-
junction silicon solar cells [5]. Single-junction perovskite devices have also demonstrated 
35.2% efficiency under indoor lighting [12]. Critically, these high efficiencies can be achieved 
through low-temperature and facile processing, namely solution-processing and thermal 
evaporation. LHPs therefore hold significant potential for reducing the LCOE and capital-
intensity of PVs.4
However, there remains debate over whether the toxicity of lead (present in a soluble form in 
LHPs) could present a barrier to terawatt-scale deployment [13]. In addition, most LHPs are 
unstable in ambient air. While there has been significant effort to address this, with 
encapsulated perovskite solar cells now having met industry stability protocols (IEC 61215-1-
3:2016) [14], LHPs used on the utility scale would ultimately need to have a field stability 
exceeding 25 years. More broadly, the success of LHPs defies conventional wisdom regarding 
the role of defects, in which high efficiencies are achieved despite thin films exhibiting large 
defect concentrations, several orders of magnitude greater than in traditional silicon or gallium 
arsenide materials [15]. This prompts the question of how such tolerance to defects arises, and 
whether this property could be generalized and designed in other classes of materials, 
especially those composed of abundant, non-toxic elements, and which are stable in air. 
 
Broadly, three strategies have been used to identify perovskite-inspired materials (PIMs): 1) 
searching for chemically-analogous materials, 2) investigating materials with a perovskite 
crystal structure, and 3) inverse design of materials based on defect tolerance [18–21]. This 
effort spans across multiple academic disciplines. The key questions focus not only on 
structure-mechanism-property relationships of the materials and their performance in devices, 
but also how computational tools are being developed to accelerate the design and discovery 
of novel materials for high-performance optoelectronic devices.  
 
In this Topical Review, we bring computational and theoretical research together with 
experimental efforts to engineer the properties and performance of these materials (Figure 1). 
Our Review begins with a discussion of the high-throughput materials discovery process, 
alongside the challenges of this research method. Following this, the chemical origins of defect 
tolerance are explored in detail, before relating these properties to the remarkable photovoltaic5
performance of LHPs and the inverse design of advanced perovskite-inspired materials (PIMs) 
that may also achieve defect tolerance. Additionally, a brief introduction to the practical 
implementation, challenges and frontiers of computational defect investigations is provided. 
We next discuss the classes of materials that have been considered, their properties, and 
synthesis methods developed. This is followed by a discussion on the performance of these 
materials in photovoltaic devices, as well as the opportunities found in using the materials for 
alternative applications (including light-emitting diodes and radiation detectors). Finally, we 
discuss the key frontiers and challenges in discovering high-performance PIMs, and the 
important questions that urgently need to be answered in order to achieve commercial 
application. 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of this Topical Review, which covers computational investigations into 
defect tolerance and tools developed for the screening of perovskite-inspired materials (PIMs), 
the properties of the materials developed and how they can be grown, and their applications in 
photovoltaics and beyond. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [22] (Copyright 2014 Royal 
Society of Chemisitry), [23] (Copyright 2019 Wiley), [24] (Copyright 2018 American 
Chemical Society), [25] (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), [26] (Copyright 2019 
American Chemical Society), [27] (Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemisitry), [28] 
(Copyright 2007 Elsevier), [29] (Copyright 2019 Wiley), [30] (Copyright 2018 American6
Chemical Society), [31] (Copyright 2015 Elsevier), [32] (Copyright 2016 Royal Society of 
Chemistry). 
 
2. Computational and Theoretical Approaches to Accelerate the Discovery of 
Perovskite-Inspired Materials  
2.1 Computational Materials Discovery 
Materials modelling is a rapidly expanding scientific field, most notably in the realm of 
materials discovery and design, where computational methods have significantly accelerated 
research efforts [33]. While computational materials science has flourished as a fertile research 
field since the 1970s, with a rich history of Nobel laureates, rapid technological advancements 
alongside financial investment have supported a renaissance in this area in recent times. Long-
established approximations are no longer necessary and simulation size/time constraints can 
be overcome, providing the capability to perform increasingly quantitative and realistic 
calculations. Historically, computer simulations have played a responsive, augmentative role 
in relation to experiment. However, these recent advances have facilitated the ability of 
computational predictions to guide experiment, representing a critical component in the 
efficient discovery of novel high-performance materials.  
The fundamental challenge of materials discovery is to identify promising candidate materials 
(for the specified application) from the near-infinite chemical space of possible compounds. 
To illustrate the scale of this physical search space, one can simply look at the Inorganic Crystal 
Structure Database (ICSD; icsd.cds.rsc.org), which contains over 150,000 entries for unique 
materials. Taking a more fundamental combinatorial approach, the number of possible two-, 
three- and four-element combinations, each with specific oxidation states and stoichiometries, 
in fact exceeds the trillions (1012 possibilities). This indicates the presence of a vast unexplored 
compositional space, which may very well contain hidden ‘wonder materials’, patiently 
waiting 
for 
the 
opportunity 
to 
revolutionize 
modern 
technologies.7
The exploration of such a broad physical space is evidently intractable to experiment or ab-
initio calculations. However, high-throughput screening procedures involving a tiered, ‘funnel’ 
approach (as depicted schematically in Figure 2) offer a promising pathway to efficiently probe 
this raw chemical landscape. 
 
Figure 2. Simplified procedural outline of a typical high-throughput screening investigation, 
with a large input material space reduced to a small selection of promising candidates for 
further experimental verification and device development. 
2.1.1 
Reducing the Search Space 
The first step in a materials discovery process is to apply certain universal constraints to 
immediately filter out unrealistic and irrelevant candidates. It is common practice to restrict the 
search space to specific material classes (compositions, structures, symmetries, motifs, etc.) 
such as, inter alia, layered compounds, perovskite structures or metal-organic frameworks, 
based on the intended application and chemical intuition. A pragmatic choice is to further8
restrict the search to abundant non-toxic elements, which are suitable candidates for wide-scale 
deployment in devices. Moreover, application of inexpensive charge neutrality, valency and 
electronegativity filters to remove chemically-implausible materials can reduce the 
combinatorial search space by two orders of magnitude [34]. 
 
A prerequisite for a viable candidate material is that it be synthesizable and (meta-)stable. 
Hence, this constraint is commonly applied at an early stage of the screening process, before 
any predictions of material properties and/or performance metrics are made. For instance, in a 
search for photoelectrochemically-active semiconductors, Davies et al. employed Shannon 
ionic radii and Goldschmidt tolerance factors to predict the stability of inorganic elemental 
combinations in the cubic or orthorhombic perovskite structure, reducing their input dataset 
from 176,851 to 26,567 possible candidates [34]. 
2.1.2 
Electronic Structure Theory 
After reducing the material search space to a computationally-tractable subset, electronic 
structure techniques may be invoked to apply a more rigorous evaluation of the remaining 
candidate materials. A widespread choice is Density Functional Theory (DFT), due to its well-
established accuracy (in predicting ground-state structures and formation energies) at relatively 
moderate computational cost. From high-throughput DFT calculations, theoretical predictions 
of relevant material properties and structure are performed, alongside validation of 
stability/synthesizability. While certain higher levels of theory, such as the inclusion of many-
body effects within the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), yield improved predictions for 
the ground-state structural polymorphs of materials (relative to semi-local DFT) [20], the 
computational expense of such approaches typically render them infeasible for high-
throughput investigations, for which speed must be prioritized over accuracy. This becomes 
increasingly apparent when one considers the success of semi-local DFT in predicting ground-9
state structures of typical chemical compounds, with only a handful of specific material classes 
requiring higher levels of theory. 
 
Within DFT, there remains the choice of the vital ingredient: the exchange-correlation 
functional, which describes the quantum mechanical electron-electron interactions. Two 
common forms are the Local Density Approximation (LDA) and the Generalized Gradient 
Approximations (GGA). Decades of practical experience have revealed clear favorites for 
various material types or structural motifs, such as PBEsol (GGA) for standard inorganic solid 
compounds [35], DFT+U for materials with magnetic interactions or localized d orbitals [36], 
and dispersion-corrected functionals such as optB86b-vdW or Grimme’s D3 for layered 
structures [37–39]. 
 
Databases of material simulations, such as the Materials Project (materialsproject.org), 
NOMAD repository (nomad-repository.eu) or MatNavi (mits.nims.go.jp), can often be of 
benefit in accelerating these initial screening steps and reducing the computational demand by 
providing calculated material structures and properties (e.g. formation energy). However, care 
must be exercised in these cases, as standardized calculation parameters (e.g. the choice of 
exchange-correlation functional) may not be suitable for certain material classes (e.g. layered 
compounds with van der Waals interactions). Thus, knowledge and experience of material 
simulations is required to judge the applicability of database information for a given screening 
investigation. 
2.1.3 
Chemical Descriptors 
At this point, the use of appropriate, well-informed, application-specific chemical descriptors 
is crucial in aiding both the efficiency and efficacy of the materials discovery process. In 
particular, these descriptors should be both central to performance and accessible by10
calculation. In the case of next-generation PV absorbers, relevant material properties would 
include the magnitude and nature (direct or indirect) of the electronic band gap 𝐸g, charge-
carrier mobilities 𝜇e/h , minority-carrier lifetimes 𝜏e/h , absorption coefficient 𝛼 and the 
photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) 𝜂 [40]. These are summarized in Table 1. 
Recently, chemical descriptors of carrier effective mass, static polaron binding energy and 
Fröhlich electron–phonon coupling were used to predict 10 candidate p-type metal oxides [41]. 
These properties can be measured or predicted through various experimental or theoretical 
techniques, each with an associated cost, researcher-effort and accuracy. Judicious choice of 
appropriate descriptors is thus vital to the success of the screening procedure in accurately and 
efficiently determining potential candidate materials for the application in question. 
Table 1. A collection of material properties and associated measurable/calculable descriptors 
relevant to the study and performance-prediction of materials for application in solar energy 
conversion. Reproduced with permission from [42]. 
Property 
Descriptor 
Calculation 
Experiment 
Optical Absorption 
Bandgap 
High-Frequency 
Dielectric Constant 
Spectroscopically 
Limited Maximum 
Efficiency (SLME) 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Solid-state Energy 
Scale (SSE) 
Tight Binding 
Analysis 
Absorption 
Spectroscopy 
Ellipsometry 
Electrical 
Conductivity 
Effective Mass 
Tensor 
Mobility (lifetimes 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Lattice Dynamics 
Hall Measurements 
Four-Point Probe 
Van der Pauw 
Measurements 
Bulk Radiative 
Recombination Rate 
Electronic Band 
Structure 
Relativistic Rashba 
Splitting 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) with 
Spin-Orbit Coupling 
Time Resolved 
Photoluminescence 
Defect Tolerance / 
Non-Radiative 
Recombination 
Dielectric Constant 
Bonding Analysis 
Defect Transition 
Levels 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Explicit Defect 
Calculations 
Time Resolved 
Absorption 
Spectroscopy11
Bulk Photovoltaic 
Effect 
Shift Current 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Terahertz Emission 
Spectroscopy 
Current-Voltage 
Relationships 
Contact Resistance 
Band Offsets 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Transmission Line 
Measurements 
Four-Point Probe 
Photoemission 
Spectroscopy 
Surface / Interface 
Recombination 
Surface Defect 
Density 
Electronic Structure 
(e.g. DFT, GW) 
Pump-Probe 
Reflectivity 
Sustainability 
Crystal/Elemental 
Abundance 
Database (e.g. 
implemented in 
SMACT 
package)[43] 
N/A 
 
Crucially, the level of theory, and hence computational overhead, required for sufficiently-
accurate calculations can vary depending on both the property and material in question. For 
instance, standard DFT functionals exhibit a systematic underestimation of electronic band 
gaps in insulating crystals, as a consequence of the ‘derivative-discontinuity’ and self-
interaction errors [33, 42]. Consequently, expensive techniques, viz. hybrid non-local DFT or 
many-body GW theory are necessary for the accurate determination of certain electronic 
properties, such as the band gap and optical absorption. At present, these costly methods are 
not readily applicable to high-throughput studies of large material datasets, despite recent 
advances in computational power. On the other hand, relatively-cheap standard DFT methods 
(such as LDA / GGA) are capable of accurately predicting the shape of electronic bands and 
thus determining related descriptors such as the charge carrier effective masses and mobilities 
[33]. 
In many cases, while the electronic band gap may be the more fundamental, performance-
defining property (in relation to the specific application of e.g. a battery electrode material), it 
may be more prudent to use standard DFT methods to calculate other relevant descriptors first12
(e.g. carrier mobility), ruling out any inappropriate candidates before implementing higher-
order, expensive techniques. In this manner, the most burdensome procedures, both in terms of 
computational demand and researcher effort, are restricted to only the most promising of 
candidates. 
The presence of heavy elements is another case for which more sophisticated treatments are 
required, necessitating the description of relativistic effects. In particular, spin-orbit coupling 
(SOC) effects scale approximately with the square of the atomic mass, and so these 
contributions become increasingly significant as one moves down the periodic table [20]. 
Further down the line, proper accounting of non-radiative recombination for the determination 
of charge-carrier lifetimes and non-ideal quantum luminescence efficiencies requires explicit 
defect calculations. As discussed in further detail in Section 2.3, these investigations demand 
substantial researcher effort and computational overhead, due to the number of distinct 
calculations 
involved 
and 
the 
mandatory 
use 
of 
large 
simulation 
supercells. 
After calculating the chosen descriptors for the material dataset, pre-determined selection 
criteria are applied so that only those materials with appropriate values for each property are 
considered. These candidate materials which successfully emerge from the chemical-descriptor 
screening stage should themselves be diligently analyzed in terms of crystal structure and 
chemical bonding. If similar characteristics evolve independently across multiple systems, 
design principles may be elucidated to accelerate materials discovery efforts and guide future 
investigations. 
2.1.4 
Performance Metrics and Figures of Merit  
Finally, a figure of merit or ‘selection metric’ is typically determined for each of the remaining 
candidates, such as the popular zT for thermoelectrics, yielding a final prediction of their 
potential success in the designated application. The ultimate purpose of the high-throughput 
materials discovery process is to identify promising candidates from vast input chemical space,13
based on the limited information available with finite resources (of time and CPU power). 
Accordingly, intelligent choice of selection metric is imperative to the success of these 
preliminary investigations.  
For PV, there is still ongoing work in this regard, and several potential figures of merit have 
been put forward, as discussed below. 
SQ Limit: In 1961, Shockley and Queisser derived the band gap-dependent radiative 
efficiency limit of a photovoltaic absorber (‘SQ Limit’), using the principle of detailed balance 
[44]. This represented a tremendously significant development in the field of PV research, 
enabling predictions of maximum absorber performance, solely on the basis of the fundamental 
electronic band gap.  
However, a number of large approximations are invoked in the SQ model, such as the 
assumption of perfect step-function absorption above the band gap 𝐸g and neglect of non-
radiative recombination (i.e. finite charge-carrier lifetimes) and material thickness. 
Consequently, several models have since been developed which go beyond the ideal SQ 
radiative efficiency limit [40, 45]. With each additional level of detail and complexity in these 
models, the predicted maximum efficiency decreases marginally from the SQ value, 
approaching a reasonable upper limit to the PV efficiency of a real-world device. 
SLME: One extension was the ‘spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency’ (SLME) proposed 
by Yu and Zunger [45], which has seen considerable use in the literature since its introduction 
in 2012 [46, 47]. The SLME extends the SQ model to include the thickness and real, non-ideal 
absorbance of materials. Additionally, the SLME has the capacity to account for finite charge-
carrier lifetimes, through specification of the internal quantum luminescence efficiency 𝑄lum,int, 
though this requires prior knowledge of the rate of non-radiative recombination.14
Blank et al.: In 2017, Blank et al. went a step further by describing the solar material using 
bulk properties, namely the refractive index and external (rather than internal) quantum 
luminescence yield 𝑄lum,ext, thereby including the effects of light outcoupling and photon 
recycling [40]. The authors applied this metric to a range of emerging thin-film PV materials, 
including CZTS (Cu2ZnSnS4), CuSbSe2 and Sb2Se3, finding that CuSbSe2 exhibits the highest 
efficiency for ideal quantum luminescence efficiencies (𝑄lum,ext = 1), but that CZTS takes the 
lead at more realistic values (𝑄lum,ext < 10−2). At present, this method entails a certain degree 
of manual calculation analysis, and so the development of a user-friendly open-source package 
to automate and streamline the process would substantially aid both the popularity of this 
performance metric and its applicability to high-throughput screening investigations. 
TLC: In 2020, Kim et al. developed a ‘trap-limited conversion’ efficiency (TLC) model to 
explicitly incorporate equilibrium populations of native defects, their carrier-capture 
coefficients, and the associated non-radiative recombination rates (Figure 3) [48]. The TLC 
model relies on Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination statistics and the principle of 
detailed balance. Such an approach can provide a “gold standard” of maximum efficiency 
prediction for assessing candidate PV absorber materials. However, it also entails significant 
computational expense, and so it is only applied to the most promising materials.15
 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the calculation of the trap-limited conversion efficiency (TLC) 
metric. The dependent calculations are numbered and connected by lines, with the relevant 
calculated quantities appended. The red and blue boxes represent calculations for radiative and 
non-radiative electron–hole recombination, respectively. The combined device simulations are 
marked in green. Adapted from Ref. [48] by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 
For example, the TLC model was recently applied to the kesterite family of quaternary thin-
film photovoltaic materials, including CZTS, AZTSe (Ag2ZnSnSe4) and others, revealing 
intrinsic defect-limited maximum efficiencies in the range of 20%. In this case, the primary 
culprits are native tin-based defects, in particular the tin-on-zinc antisite SnZn. These defects 
produce electronic states deep in the band gap, which act as ‘killer’ recombination centers, 
severely reducing charge-carrier lifetimes (as further discussed in Section 2.2.1). This work 
offered valuable insight regarding the physical origins of poor experimentally-observed PV 
performance of these materials, which despite years of intense research and SQ radiative limits 
of ∼33% [49], have as-yet failed to exceed power-conversion efficiencies of 12% [50]. 
 
In light of the fact that the efficiencies of actual PV devices are in most cases limited by non-
radiative recombination (the effects of which are illustrated in Figure 4) [51, 52], it is16
imperative that this loss mechanism is treated in first-principles investigations of PV 
performance. Indeed, champion materials from each respective generation of solar absorbers 
(c-Si, CdTe, MAPbI3) demonstrate slow non-radiative electron-hole recombination kinetics 
which, in combination with large PLQE η and small Urbach tails, affords solar energy 
conversion efficiencies close to their radiative limits [53]. Extending the scope of materials 
discovery procedures to include these defect-governed properties will lead to improved 
predictions of successful next-generation photovoltaic materials. 
 
Figure 4. Shockley–Queisser limit and trap-limited-conversion (TLC) efficiencies for the 
kesterite family of thin-film PV materials. Filled symbols represent the TLC power-conversion 
efficiency and the black line is the SQ limit. TLCs with doping (triangles) show improved 
performances over TLCs without doping (circles). Plus signs indicate experimental data for 
kesterite solar cells. Adapted from Ref. [48] by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 
 
2.2 Perovskite-Inspired Design Principles and Defect Tolerance 
Following the impressive optoelectronic performance of LHPs, recent efforts in the field have 
focused on leveraging theory to understand the physical properties underpinning their success 
[20]. From these chemical insights, design rules and screening criteria may be developed to 
guide the search for high-performance ‘perovskite-inspired materials’ (PIMs).17
Undoubtedly, a defining feature of lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) is a remarkable tolerance to 
non-stoichiometry and crystalline defects, which facilitates their high PV efficiencies despite 
low-cost, solution-based synthesis routes. While deliberate implementation of defects plays an 
essential role in many relevant technological applications, such as topological insulators, 
quantum materials and, of course, doped semiconductors [54], the unintentional presence of 
defects can often trigger serious degradation in device performance [48]. In fact, as previously 
mentioned, provided the electronic band gap is in the appropriate range for an efficient PV 
material (~0.8 to 1.8 eV) [44], the most common performance-limiting factor for new absorbers 
is non-radiative recombination [51, 52]. By reducing the minority charge-carrier lifetime, non-
radiative recombination impedes the collection of photo-generated carriers at the device 
terminals, thereby decreasing the open-circuit voltage.  
We define defect tolerance as the tendency of a material to exhibit long minority carrier 
lifetimes (due to slow electron-hole recombination kinetics) despite the presence of 
crystallographic defects. This phenomenon has been definitively identified as a crucial factor 
in the success of LHPs [21, 54]. Many high-efficiency systems, such as single-crystal GaAs, 
are known to be extremely intolerant to the presence of point defects, necessitating a series of 
sophisticated and expensive procedures (in a clean room, or at high temperature) to fabricate 
pristine crystals for efficient PV devices. In contrast, perovskite solar cells may be synthesized 
via solution-based processing in normal laboratory environments at lower temperatures, which 
are typically up to only 100 C. Nevertheless, LHPs manage to exhibit remarkably long 
minority carrier lifetimes and high PV efficiencies. Characterizing and understanding the 
physical mechanisms behind this extraordinary defect tolerance is thus a key research focus for 
the discovery, design and development of low-cost, high-efficiency next-generation solar cells. 
2.2.1 
Shockley-Read-Hall Theory of Non-Radiative Recombination18
From Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) theory, it is predicted that traps most likely to facilitate non-
radiative recombination are those near the center of the electronic band gap [55]. Within this 
model, carrier-capture rates decrease exponentially with increasing energy separation between 
the defect transition level and the respective band-edge (i.e. the ‘depth’ of the defect level). 
Electron-hole recombination is a two-(quasi)particle process, and so a defect must sequentially 
capture both an electron and a hole for non-radiative recombination to occur, as depicted in 
Figure 5. The total recombination rate is limited by the slower of the two capture processes. 
Thus, the closer a defect level is to the mid-gap region, the more rapid the recombination 
kinetics expected for an intrinsic semiconductor. Beyond the depth of the trap levels, there are 
several other important factors that contribute to the recombination activity of a particular 
defect (vide Section 2.3), including the accessible charge states, concentration, and capture 
coefficient. 
 
 
Figure 5. Electronic energy diagram of Shockley-Read-Hall recombination at a defect level 
ΔE = ε(q1/q2) above the valence-band maximum (VBM)(More on charge transition levels in 
Section 2.3.3). Electron and hole capture rates, Rn and Rp, are exponentially dependent on the 
energy separation between trap level and band-edge. 
 
Shallow and Deep Defect States 
Point defects are typically classified as ‘shallow’ or ‘deep’ according to a variety of criteria, 
such as the localization of the donor/acceptor wavefunction [56], the relative magnitudes of the19
carrier capture and emission coefficients [57], or, most commonly, the energetic position(s) of 
the defect charge transition level(s) in the band gap [21, 48, 54]. Deep defects typically exhibit 
localized electronic wavefunctions and charge transition levels ‘deep’ within the band gap. 
Shallow defect states, on the other hand, produce delocalized wavefunctions with charge 
transition levels near or within the continuum electron bands, thereby remaining innocuous 
with respect to carrier lifetimes and PV performance. 
2.2.2 
What Makes a Material Defect Tolerant? 
2.2.2.1 Orbital Character 
In an elemental semiconductor such as Si, there is a bonding valence band maximum (VBM) 
and an anti-bonding conduction band minimum (CBM), as depicted in Figure 6a. A point 
defect, such as a vacancy, can therefore produce non-bonding states at the center of the band 
gap. Initially, defect tolerance was attributed to a change in the bonding character of the band-
edges [54, 58]. This concept posited that the formation of shallow traps would be favored if 
the VBM originated from anti-bonding interactions and the CBM from bonding interactions. 
Non-bonding defect states would therefore fall in the valence or conduction band continua, 
rather than the band gap. This type of bonding is often associated with the presence of d10 
cations (e.g. Cu+), and has been, for example, observed in Cu3N [59]. In Cu3N, p-d orbital 
repulsion (due to the presence of filled Cu 3d states) produces anti-bonding character at the 
VBM, with similar interactions leading to a bonding-type CBM. 
Analogously, a similar phenomenon has been observed for LHPs, in which orbital repulsion 
between the halide anion p states and cation s2 lone-pair acts as the source of anti-bonding 
interactions at the valence band-edge. However, in LHPs, the hybridization of the Pb 6p and 
anion p orbitals results in the formation of an anti-bonding state at the CBM (as opposed to the 
bonding-character CBM of Cu3N), with the bonding orbital forming within the valence band 
[21]. This orbital arrangement is illustrated in Figure 6b, and is conducive to shallow defect20
formation because the original atomic orbitals (from which non-bonding defect states arise) are 
close to or within the continuum bands, rather than deep within the band gap (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Electronic structure of typical ‘defect intolerant’ III–V, II–VI, or group IV 
semiconductors (left), prone to the formation of deep defect levels, compared to the ‘defect 
tolerant’ anti-bonding valence band of the lead halide perovskites (right). Adapted with 
permission from [21]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
 
A similar ‘defect-tolerant’ electronic structure can occur in the case of substantial band-edge 
splitting and dispersion, whether by spin-orbit or crystal-field effects. Through shifting and 
broadening the continuum electronic bands, the band-edges are pushed toward (if not beyond) 
the atomic orbital energy levels, in a manner analogous to that depicted in Figure 6. Likewise, 
this situation promotes the formation of shallow defect states. 
2.2.2.2 Coordination Environment 
Charge-carriers may be trapped at a deep defect state by long-range electrostatic and/or short-
range (orbital overlap and hybridization) potentials, with the former dominating in ionic 
materials and the latter more relevant for covalent compounds [60, 61]. In covalent 
semiconductors, hybridization of dangling-bonds at a defect center is thus a governing factor 
for the depth of the resultant charge transition level [62–64], as alluded to in the original defect 
tolerance concept above.21
In the case of an anion vacancy, which is positively-charged in the fully ionized state (e.g. VI+ 
in CsPbI3), the donor-type defect can trap a free electron by localizing it in the unoccupied p 
orbitals of the surrounding cations. The addition of an electron will cause these neighboring 
cations to slightly contract, on account of Coulomb attraction, thereby lowering the energy of 
the localized electron (due to increased hybridization of the dangling p orbitals). The strength 
of this electronic stabilization, relative to the strain energy from nearby stretched bonds, 
determines the trapping energy of the defect (i.e. depth of the defect transition level). If the 
orbital hybridization is not sufficiently strong, this localized electronic state will be unstable 
and the defect will instead adopt the energetically-favored shallow hydrogenic donor state, with 
the electron located at the defect-perturbed CBM. 
The strength of this cation-cation interaction at the anion vacancy site will be dependent on 
both the anion coordination environment and the cation-cation distances, with low coordination 
numbers and large inter-cationic distances associated with weak hybridization and shallow 
defect levels. Thus, the presence of large anions and bond lengths with low anion coordination 
is predicted to aid defect tolerance, particularly in the case of chalcogenides, halides and 
chalcohalides, since anion vacancies are typically the primary native donor defects in these 
materials [63, 64]. 
In Ref. [64], Kim et al. provide an instructive example of this behavior; employing an 
‘inorganic frame model’ to decouple the chemical and structural effects of halide substitution 
on the anion-vacancy defect level for inorganic lead-halide perovskites. They demonstrate that 
the halide vacancy (VX, X = I, Br, Cl) transforms from a delocalized shallow state in [PbI3]- 
and [PbBr3]- to a localized deep state in [PbCl3]- (Figure 7), as a result of lattice contraction 
(hence increased hybridization) from the smaller anionic radius, alongside band-shifting 
effects.22
 
Figure 7. Charge density isosurfaces of VX (X = I, Br, Cl) in (a) [PbI3]-, (b) [PbBr3]- and (c) 
[PbCl3]-. For [PbI3]- and [PbBr3]- in (a) and (b), the orbital configuration of the halide anion 
vacancy VX is primarily Pb 6p - X p anti-bonding character, matching that of the CBM (i.e. a 
shallow perturbed CBM state). For [PbCl3]- in (c), however, a localized Pb 6p bonding state is 
formed. In (d), the orbital configuration for the formation of deep halide vacancy defects in 
[PbCl3]- is shown. Adapted with permission from Ref. [64] with permission from the PCCP 
Owner Societies. 
Analogous behavior could hypothetically occur for cation vacancy sites, with the strength of 
anion-anion dangling bond hybridization contributing to the depth of the acceptor defect level. 
That said, to the knowledge of the authors, this mechanism has not yet been ascribed to the 
formation of shallow acceptor states in a defect tolerant material. One likely reason for this is 
the fact that band-structure defect tolerance effects (Section 2.2.2.1) are not always 
independent of structural effects. For instance, in the hypothetical cubic PbI2, tetrahedral Pb 
coordination and shorter Pb-I distances strengthen the anti-bonding orbital interaction at the 
VBM, yielding shallow cation vacancies, as opposed to the deep states found in ground-state 
layered PbI2 [65]. However, this coordination environment implies greater dangling-bond 
hybridization, and deeper defect states. The fact that, in this case, the energy upshift of the 
VBM outweighs that of the dangling-bond defect states, results in overall shallow cation 
vacancies.23
 
In a similar manner, defect tolerance has been partially ascribed to ionic bonding in certain 
perovskite materials [61, 66, 67], with reduced covalency yielding lower energy dangling 
bonds and hence shallower defect levels. However, as mentioned earlier, long-range 
electrostatics may also induce charge localization and hence deep defect formation in 
heteropolar/ionic systems; the strength of this interaction being mediated by the dielectric 
constant of the material [60]. Thus, one should be wary of suggesting decreased covalency as 
an indication of potential defect tolerance in a candidate material, as it is a delicate balance of 
several competing effects (ion coordination, bond length, hybridization, bonding character, 
crystal symmetry, oxidation state, Jahn-Teller distortion, etc.), which ultimately determine the 
energetic position of the defect charge transition level.  
 
These points serve to highlight the intricacy of the physics governing the defect wavefunction, 
which must be carefully maneuvered when attempting to construct robust defect tolerance 
design principles. 
2.2.2.3 Defect-Carrier Coulomb Interactions 
An electron or hole in a semiconducting material may be attracted or repelled from a charged 
point defect due to simple Coulomb interactions, increasing or decreasing the carrier-trapping 
rate relative to the neutral case. This electrostatic effect is incorporated via the Sommerfeld 
enhancement factor ⟨𝑠⟩, which for the attractive case is given by [68, 69]: 
 
⟨𝑠⟩ =  4|𝑄
𝑞|√𝜋𝐸𝑅
𝑘𝐵𝑇 ∝ |𝑄|
𝜀√𝑚∗
𝑇 
 
(1) 
where |𝑄| is the absolute charge of the point defect, 𝑞 and 𝑚∗ are, respectively, the carrier 
charge and effective mass, ε is the (low-frequency) dielectric constant, 𝑇 is the temperature 
and 𝐸𝑅 is the effective Rydberg energy:24
 
𝐸𝑅 = 𝑚∗𝑞4
2ℏ2𝜀2 
 
(2) 
Depending on the dielectric and conductive properties of the material, the Sommerfeld factor 
⟨𝑠⟩ can range from anywhere between ~ 0.1 to 20, therefore strongly influencing electron-hole 
recombination kinetics and subsequent charge-carrier lifetimes. From visual inspection of 
Equation (1), it is evident that several material properties can influence the magnitude of this 
carrier-capture enhancement factor, thereby contributing to the defect (in)tolerance of a 
material. 
Enhanced Dielectric Screening: The dielectric constant reflects the ability of a compound to 
screen an electrostatic perturbation. Numerous material properties critical to the physics of a 
PV device, such as the rates of carrier-capture and ionized impurity scattering, the depth of 
shallow defect levels and exciton binding energies, are dependent on the dielectric constant 
[54]. For a given defect concentration, a larger dielectric constant corresponds to stronger 
Coulombic screening and hence diminished defect carrier-capture cross-sections (⟨s⟩ ∝ 1/ε), 
thereby suppressing the rate of non-radiative recombination. 
Oxidation States: The oxidation states of species in a material determines the relative 
likelihood of different charge states for a given defect [70]. For instance, in CdTe, cadmium is 
formally in the +2 oxidation state, and so a cadmium vacancy VCd can take on the neutral and 
-2 charge states; VCdx and VCd’’ in the Kröger-Vink formalism [71]. For a highly-charged 
defect, the kinetics of carrier-capture, and hence electron-hole recombination, can be 
accelerated relative to the neutral case (⟨s⟩ ∝ |Q|). Thus, low oxidation-state materials may be 
more likely to contain low-charge defects with reduced carrier-trapping rates. 
Effective Mass: Spatial localization of electron and hole wavefunctions at defect sites can slow 
charge-carrier transport and is associated with thermal losses. A small effective mass will favor25
delocalized, nearly-free charge-carriers with decreased defect capture cross-sections (⟨𝑠⟩∝
𝑚∗). Of course, a small effective mass is also beneficial for the carrier mobility and electrical 
conductivity of the device, as well as preventing the formation of small polarons [54]. 
2.2.2.4 Benign Complex Formation 
Another proposed technique for the design of defect-tolerant materials is the passivation of 
‘killer’ defect centers via the deliberate formation of benign defect complexes [54, 67, 72]. In 
this case, defect-defect interactions are leveraged to shift deep-levels closer to (or even into) 
the continuum bands, ‘bleaching the gap’ of deleterious trap states. The main adversary in this 
situation, however, is the entropic cost associated with defect-complex formation, which must 
be overcome either by an adequate enthalpy gain or the creation of metastable arrangements 
via intelligent synthesis strategies. Due to the inherent difficulty in engineering this state, this 
strategy remains largely unexplored for the design of novel defect tolerant materials. 
2.2.2.5 Self-Inhibiting Defect Levels 
If a defect center produces multiple levels in the band gap, rather than accelerate the 
recombination kinetics as one might initially expect, these extra levels often ‘self-inhibit’, 
reducing the overall rate of recombination [73, 74]. In this situation, it is likely that one of the 
defect levels is near a band-edge, far from the gap center. Due to the exponential dependence 
of charge-capture rate on the energetic separation of the defect level and corresponding band-
edge (i.e. the ‘depth’ of the defect level), enormous imbalances in charge transition rates can 
arise in this case, leading to defects becoming ‘stuck’ in extreme charge states. Being near a 
continuum band, the near-edge defect level efficiently captures and re-emits the corresponding 
charge carrier (hole if near the VBM or electron if near the CBM). However, as depicted in 
Figure 8, capture of the opposite charge carrier is exceptionally slow. Consequently, the 
majority of defects adopt the extreme charge state, exhibiting sluggish carrier capture and 
recombination kinetics.26
 
Figure 8. Energy level diagram of carrier capture and SRH recombination at two defect levels 
in the band gap, demonstrating ‘self-inhibiting’ behavior. (More on charge transition levels in 
Section 2.3.3). Under the SRH model, the exponential dependence of carrier capture rate 𝐑𝐧 
on the energy separation between trap level and band-edge leads to a buildup of defects in the 
X+ state. This defect charge state exhibits weak carrier capture kinetics, thus suppressing non-
radiative recombination. 
On the other hand, the highly recombination-active charge states (which produce the mid-gap 
transition level) have almost negligible concentration and thus minimal overall recombination 
activity. Another way to conceptualize this mechanism is to recall that the total recombination 
rate for a given defect species is dictated by the slowest capture process involved (Section 
2.2.1). Hence, the incredibly slow capture rate of the extreme charge state introduces a 
bottleneck in the recombination cycle, greatly diminishing the overall recombination activity 
of the defect. Such tolerance can similarly occur in the case of strong anharmonicity, whereby 
transition rate imbalances are driven by a lack of symmetry in potential energy surfaces and 
charge capture barriers [74]. 
2.2.2.6 Related Defect Tolerant Characteristics 
Crystal Structure: In any material, the crystal structure is a governing factor in the resultant 
electronic structure. Highly-symmetric crystal structures (viz. cubic phases such as halites, 
CsCl-type structures and cubic perovskites) tend to exhibit isotropic bonding and transport 
properties. Often, this behavior produces a direct fundamental  gap (though the optical gap may 
still be indirect, due to strong selection rules) and relatively disperse band extrema, resulting27
in low effective masses [75, 76]. On the other hand, highly-anisotropic compounds such as 
layered materials often exhibit heavy effective masses and relatively flat electronic bands. 
More importantly, the crystal structure significantly influences the strength of both dangling-
bond hybridization (Section 2.2.2.2) and orbital repulsion at band-edges (Section 2.2.2.1). 
Cation Electronic Configuration: The electronic configuration of the cation is associated 
with a number of defect-tolerant properties in a material. In halide perovskites, an important 
case is the formation of the 6s2 lone pair configuration of Pb2+ in MAPbI3, which has a partially 
oxidized valence electron shell relative to the fully-ionized 6s06p0 Pb4+ ion. The resulting large, 
polarizable cation induces large Born effective charges (and thus a high dielectric constant) 
alongside stronger spin-orbit coupling of the unoccupied cation p states in the conduction band 
(hence increased band dispersion, favoring shallow donor defects, and reduced electron 
effective mass) [76, 77]. Moreover, filled s2 orbitals can partially hybridize with the valence-
band-dominated anion p orbitals, introducing anti-bonding character in the VBM (encouraging 
the formation of shallow acceptor defects) and broadening the valence bandwidth (thus 
reducing the hole effective mass). 
This stable ‘N-2’ lone-pair oxidation state, and accompanying effects, is most commonly 
observed for the heavy post-transition metals in the sixth row of the periodic table (i.e. Tl+, 
Pb2+ and Bi3+), due to the relativistic contraction (and consequent stabilization) of the valence 
s orbital [78, 79]. Nonetheless, lighter cations (namely In+, Sn2+ and Sb3+) may also adopt these 
oxidation states in PV materials [76, 79, 80]. Moreover, strongly electronegative anions (F-, 
Cl-, O2- etc.) are more likely to fully oxidize the cations, hence softer elements (S2-, Se2-, I- etc.) 
are often required to stabilize the cation lone-pair. 
A salient point, regarding the valence band anion p - cation s hybridization, is that the strength 
of this interaction (hence degree of dispersion and anti-bonding character at the band-edge) is28
dependent on the alignment and overlap of the atomic orbitals. If the cation lone-pair is much 
deeper than the higher-energy anion p orbitals, there will be minimal interaction between these 
states, with a consequently negligible contribution from the cation states to the band-edge. 
Indeed, this has been observed for certain Bi3+ lone-pair materials which were recently 
investigated as potential solar absorbers, including BiI3 and Cs2AgBiBr6 [21, 46, 79]. 
This point provides an instructive example of the specificity of certain defect tolerance 
mechanisms, which unfortunately prevents the decoupling of elemental contributions to this 
phenomenon. Rather than simply searching for materials with stable lone-pair cations, one 
must also consider their pairing with compatible anions to achieve the desired response.  
2.2.3 
Defect Tolerance in Lead Halide Perovskites 
There has been much research on the atomistic origins of the strong defect tolerance exhibited 
by lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) [21, 54, 57, 64, 74–77, 81, 82]. Despite some disagreement 
in the literature [74, 81, 82], likely due to the multi-faceted origin of this phenomenon in LHPs, 
several material properties have now been definitively identified to contribute to the 
remarkable defect tolerance of these materials. 
 
2.2.3.1 Defect Tolerant Band Structure 
Firstly, as depicted for the valence band in Figure 6, perovskites exhibit a unique band structure 
in which interaction between the B-site cation ns2 lone-pair and the anion p orbitals produces 
a dispersive, anti-bonding VBM. As discussed above, this situation is predicted to yield 
predominantly shallow acceptor-type defects, such as cation vacancies, alongside small hole 
effective masses (and thus a decreased hole capture rate, per (1) [21, 57, 76].  
In addition, for a heavy cation, such as Pb2+ in MAPbI3, strong spin-orbit coupling broadens 
the bandwidth of the CBM, reducing the occurrence of deep donor defects in a similar manner29
to the bonding-character CBM in Figure 6. Greater conduction band dispersion also lowers the 
electron effective mass, thus decreasing the rate of electron trapping per (1). 
2.2.3.2 Cationic Lone Pair 
The 6s2 electronic configuration of Pb2+ also aids defect tolerance in MAPbI3 through a 
dramatic contribution to the dielectric properties of the material [62]. Born effective charges, 
describing the ionic polarizability, are enhanced by the presence of the Pb2+ cationic lone-pair. 
The resulting increase in mixed ionic-covalent bonding character leads to a massively-
increased dielectric constant (εr > 25), which is approximately three times greater than that of 
other thin-film solar absorbers, such as CdTe and CZTS [54, 57, 77]. By effectively screening 
charged defect centers and enhancing carrier mobility, the highly-polarizable lone-pair 
emphatically suppresses non-radiative recombination and improves photovoltaic performance. 
To illustrate the influence of a small effective mass 𝑚∗, large permittivity εr and low absolute 
oxidation states (+1, +2 and -1 respectively for the prototypical ABX3 perovskite) on defect 
tolerance in LHPs, one can inspect the attractive Sommerfeld enhancement factor ⟨𝑠⟩ for 
carrier capture. For a typical singly-charged defect in MAPbI3 (e.g. VI+), ⟨𝑠⟩≃2, compared to 
⟨𝑠⟩≃10 for a triply-charged defect in GaAs (e.g. VAs3+), using values for 𝑚∗ and εr quoted in 
[57]. 
 
 
 
2.2.3.3 Anion Coordination Environment 
Beyond the effects of the valence s2 lone pair, the low coordination number (2) of iodine, in 
conjunction with the expanded lattice constant from the methylammonium A-site cation, gives 
rise to weak Pb-Pb hybridization at the iodine anion vacancy center. This weak interaction is 
insufficient to create a deep bound state, further aiding defect tolerance in this material [62,30
63]. Despite the presence of partial ionic character, long-range electrostatic effects are also 
unable to localize charge in this case, due to the small band gap and effective dielectric 
screening [60, 61]. 
The success of MAPbI3 in combining weak cation-cation dangling-bond hybridization with a 
defect-tolerant electronic structure (Section 2.2.3.1) indicates that ternary or multinary 
compounds may provide a fruitful search space for the discovery of new defect-tolerant 
materials [65]. In particular, materials which exhibit ‘pseudobinary’ behavior, containing a 
spectator ion which does not contribute to the band-edge states (cf. MA+ cation in MAPbI3), 
may be more likely to simultaneously exhibit low ion coordination and orbital repulsion at 
band-edges.  
2.2.3.4 Inactive Deep States 
On the other hand, the few deep intrinsic defects that do still exist in LHPs, including iodine 
antisites IPb and IMA, lead-iodine antisite PbI and interstitial lead Pbi, have been shown to 
demonstrate weak recombination activity [74, 83]. The physical reason behind this inactivity 
has been debated. Initially, it was attributed to large predicted formation enthalpies, which 
would result in low concentrations with little to no adverse effect on carrier lifetimes [21, 83]. 
Recently however, this finding has been challenged, with ‘self-inhibition’ (as a result of 
multiple intra-gap defect levels) predicted to be the origin of slow recombination kinetics for 
IPb and PbI antisites [74]. The authors suggest that both anharmonic carrier-capture barriers and 
the presence of additional near-edge defect levels introduce bottlenecks in the non-radiative 
recombination cycle (vide Section 2.2.2.5), thereby rendering LHPs tolerant to these deep traps. 
2.2.3.5 Low Schottky Defect Formation Energies31
In addition, theoretical and experimental investigations have found low formation enthalpies 
of intrinsic Schottky-type defects (i.e. cation vacancy - anion vacancy complexes) [67, 72], 
suggesting high concentrations of benign defect complexes. 
2.2.3.6 Self-Healing 
Finally, the soft crystal framework and relatively low melting temperature of LHPs points at 
the possibility of appreciable ion diffusion and ‘self-healing’ of defects at typical processing 
temperatures, resulting in fewer recombination-active defect center [84, 85]. Moreover, this 
leads to small phonon energies in MAPbI3, which also contribute to a reduction in carrier 
capture rates [57, 86]. 
2.2.4 
Target Features for Defect Tolerance 
Through thorough investigation and enhanced understanding of the physical origins of defect 
tolerance in LHPs, it is hoped that general design principles may be developed for ‘perovskite-
inspired’ defect-tolerant materials. 
Such target material features include: (i) band-edge orbital repulsion (bonding character); (ii) 
large polarizable cation(s) (aiding dielectric screening of charged defects, band dispersion and 
anti-bonding valence band interactions – assuming sufficient spatial overlap and energetic 
alignment with anionic states); (iii) low atomic coordination alongside large ionic radii and 
lattice constants (reducing dangling-bond hybridization); (iv) mixed ionic-covalent bonding 
character (strengthening dielectric screening and suppressing dangling-bond hybridization); (v) 
crystal anharmonicity and/or multiple intra-gap defect levels (promoting ‘self-inhibition’); (vi) 
low formation enthalpies for innocuous defect complexes; and (vii) soft crystal framework (to 
allow ‘self-healing’).32
There is a plethora of ongoing research focusing on the implementation of these design 
principles as target features for high-throughput materials screening, with the goal of 
discovering next-generation defect-tolerant PV materials which are capable of rivalling the 
performance of the LHP prototype [21, 46, 57, 64, 74–77, 81, 82]. While there are likely few 
materials that match the wealth of defect-tolerant properties exhibited by lead-halide 
perovskites, with intelligent discovery techniques driven by detailed understanding of the 
underlying chemistry (as depicted in Figure 9), one can hope that further successful absorber 
materials may be unearthed. 
 
Figure 9. Outline of the synergistic combination of high-throughput screening, detailed 
theoretical investigation and experimental characterization to yield accelerated pathways to the 
discovery of defect-tolerant materials for low-cost high-efficiency devices. Red arrow indicates 
the feedback loop between target features for material screening and explicit defect 
investigations, affording refined design principles and screening criteria for efficient materials 
discovery. 
 
In the context of materials screening, some of these material properties are relatively simple to 
predict a priori, for example the cation electronic configuration, bonding covalency and ionic 
radii, while others, such as those involving orbital interactions or carrier-capture kinetics, can 
be tremendously challenging. For instance, accurate calculation of the energetic alignment of 
cation lone-pair and anion p states (to predict anti-bonding interactions at the VBM in a 
perovskite-structured material) is often a computationally taxing procedure, requiring a high33
level of theory. Identification of ‘self-inhibition’, whether by crystal anharmonicity or multiple 
intra-gap levels, requires defect-specific, quantitative investigations [74]. Likewise, prediction 
of benign defect complexes is not readily amenable to high-throughput computation, due to the 
enormous configurational space and inherent complexity involved, on top of the substantial 
cost of defect calculations. This point serves to reinforce the importance of strategic 
organization of materials screening steps, alongside the judicious selection of chemical 
descriptors and success criteria, on the basis of relevance, cost, accuracy and researcher-effort. 
After applying these design principles at an intermediate stage of the screening process 
(through the use of appropriate chemical descriptors), explicit defect calculations may then be 
performed on the most promising remaining candidates at the bottom of ‘screening funnel’ 
(Figure 2), in order to fully assess their defect tolerance potential and to yield an accurate 
performance figure of merit (SLME, Blank et al., TLC...). In Section 2.3, we provide a brief 
overview of the practical calculation of relevant defect properties from first-principles. 
2.3 Ab-Initio Defect Calculations 
A wide range of defect properties (including formation energies, equilibrium concentrations, 
charge transition energy levels, carrier capture coefficients, etc.) are now accessible to 
theoretical investigation, due in no small part to the aforementioned advances in theory and 
computational capacity. By elucidating the physical underpinnings of defect behavior in solids, 
chemical models of improved accuracy may be constructed in order to better predict, describe 
and design defect-related material properties. Such insights can enable researchers to tune 
material properties via strategic manipulation of defect concentrations (through carefully-
controlled synthesis conditions), whether to deliberately introduce defects (e.g. for doping-
induced conductivity or enhanced lasing action [87]) or to mitigate the effects of deleterious 
defects (e.g. for improved PV efficiency or battery lifetime [54, 88, 89]).34
The purpose of this section is to give a brief flavor of the practical implementation, frontiers 
and challenges of this research. For a more detailed overview of the theory, state-of-the-art and 
practical aspects of defect calculations, the keen reader is directed elsewhere [56, 90, 91]. 
2.3.1 
Supercell Approach 
Density Functional Theory (DFT) has established itself as the most powerful technique for 
first-principles investigations in solid-state physics [92, 93], including point-defect calculations 
[90]. Within DFT, the most widely employed method for defect calculations is, by far, the 
‘supercell’ approach with a plane wave basis set [56, 90, 91]. This involves placing a defect in 
an expanded crystal unit cell of the ‘host’ material (termed a ‘supercell’) with anywhere from 
~ 50 to 200 atoms, which is then periodically repeated through space. In doing so, researchers 
may exploit the power and versatility of periodic DFT codes, while also guaranteeing an 
accurate description of the host material in most cases. 
 
Figure 10. Contribution of various terms in the calculation of defect formation energy.- 
Adapted with permission from Ref. [94]. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
 
2.3.2 
Defect Formation Energy35
Both equilibrium concentrations and charge transition energy levels are determined by the 
formation energies of the corresponding defect states. The formation energy 𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞(𝐸𝐹, 𝜇) of a 
defect 𝑋 in charge state 𝑞 is given by: 
 
𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞(𝐸𝐹, 𝜇) = [𝐸𝑋,𝑞 − 𝐸𝐻] − ∑𝑛𝑖
𝑖
𝜇𝑖 +  𝑞𝐸𝐹 + 𝐸𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑞) 
 
(3) 
The contribution of each of these terms to the calculated defect formation energy 𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞(𝐸𝐹, 𝜇) 
is illustrated diagrammatically in Figure . 𝐸𝑋,𝑞 is the calculated energy of the defect-containing 
finite-sized supercell, while 𝐸𝐻 is the energy of an equivalent pristine host supercell. The 
second term (− ∑𝑛𝑖
𝑖
𝜇𝑖) accounts for the thermodynamic cost of exchanging 𝑛𝑖 atoms with 
their reservoir chemical potential(s) 𝜇𝑖, to form the defect 𝑋𝑞 from the ideal bulk material. 
Analogously, 𝑞𝐸𝐹 represents the energetic cost of removal or addition of charge 𝑞 to the defect 
site, from the electronic reservoir of the system (i.e. the Fermi energy 𝐸𝐹). Finally, 𝐸𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑞) is 
a correction for any spurious finite-size supercell effects. 
As mentioned previously, the dependence of defect formation energy 𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞(𝐸𝐹, 𝜇), and hence 
equilibrium concentration, on atomic chemical potentials 𝜇𝑖 allows for the manipulation of 
defect populations, via controlled synthesis conditions. Indeed, high-efficiency perovskite 
solar cells have relied on the strategic manipulation of iodine chemical potentials during crystal 
growth in order to suppress non- radiative recombination channels [88]. 
2.3.3 
Charge Transition Energy Levels 
Defects in semiconductors typically introduce electronic levels near or within the band gap, 
which determine the interaction of the defect site with charge carriers in the material. These 
electronic levels are the ‘thermodynamic charge transition levels’ 𝜀(𝑞1/𝑞2), defined as the 
Fermi level position for which the formation energies of the defect in charge states 𝑞1 and 𝑞2 
are equal [90]:36
 
𝜀(𝑞1/𝑞2) = { 𝐸𝐹  |  𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞1(𝐸𝐹) = 𝛥𝐻𝑋,𝑞2(𝐸𝐹) } 
 
(4) 
 
Figure 11. Defect charge transition levels from a formation energy (with respect to Fermi 
level) plot (left) and on an energy band diagram (right). Drawn based on the defect 
calculation and processing tools available at Ref. [95]. 
 
As illustrated in Figure 11, charge state 𝒒𝟏 is stable for Fermi level below 𝛆(𝒒𝟏/𝒒𝟐), while for 
Fermi levels above 𝛆(𝒒𝟏/𝒒𝟐), charge state 𝒒𝟐 is stable (𝒒𝟏> 𝒒𝟐, by convention). Charge 
transition levels are crucial to the electronic behavior of defects, as their energetic position 
within the host band structure is a dominant factor in the recombination activity of defect 
centers (vide Section 2.2.1). 
 
Employing the computational methods described in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, charge transition 
levels may be theoretically predicted via equations (3(4 (as illustrated in Figure 11. Moreover, 
these levels may be experimentally detected via techniques such as Deep-level Transient 
Spectroscopy (DLTS) [90]. This highlights the importance of these properties in defect 
investigations, as they allow for the powerful combination of theory and experiment to yield 
enhanced understanding of defect behavior. Through comparison of theoretical and 
experimental results, computational methods may be validated, and experimental observations 
may be interpreted and understood in detail. 
2.3.4 
Computational Overhead37
While standard DFT methods (i.e. LDA/GGA) are capable of producing reliable crystal 
structures (in most cases), systematic failures in the prediction of band gaps (Section 2.1.2) and 
charge localization render them unsuitable for investigations of defect electronic structure. 
These electronic properties are crucial to defect behavior, determining the position of charge 
transition levels in the host band structure and hence the nature of the defect trap state. This 
issue is tackled via the use of ‘beyond-DFT’ methods, the most popular choice being hybrid 
DFT, which inevitably entail significant inflation of the computational demand. This 
requirement of expensive, high-level electronic structure theory, in conjunction with large 
simulation supercells (Section 2.3.1), is the primary culprit behind the substantial 
computational cost associated with defect calculations. 
2.3.5 
Frontiers and Challenges of Defect Modelling 
2.3.5.1 Automation and Databases 
At present, defect investigations entail exorbitant levels of manual researcher effort, due to the 
large number of individual calculations required. Fortunately, a number of computational 
packages have been released (including PyCDT [96], PyLada [94], COFFEE [97], 
sxdefectalign [98], CarrierCapture.jl [99], CPLAP [100], SC-Fermi [101]...), which can assist 
with efficient pre- and post-processing of these calculations. Through continued development 
of comprehensive, flexible, user-friendly computational tools, researchers hope to accelerate 
the efficiency of defect studies and expand their applicability to high-throughput materials 
discovery. 
Furthermore, powered by a rapid growth in computational power and availability of automation 
frameworks such as AiiDA [102] and FireWorks [103], databases of material simulations are 
being extended to include ab-initio defect calculations. These invaluable resources will provide 
the opportunity to gain powerful chemical insights, especially when combined with machine 
learning models and data science techniques.38
2.3.5.2 Carrier Capture 
A crucial step in the process of non-radiative electron-hole recombination is the capture of 
delocalized charge carriers by defect traps, via electron-phonon coupling. Recent years have 
seen the development of theory and computational tools to quantitatively model this process 
[99, 104, 105], though further improvements in efficiency, versatility, and reliability are 
necessary to extend this approach to general application. 
2.3.5.3 Additional Hurdles 
Further challenges faced by defect studies include transferability issues (due to inconsistent 
realizations of electronic structure theory and finite-size corrections), accurate treatment of 
finite-temperature effects (demanding substantial computational and researcher effort [90]) and 
modelling of diffusion/transport properties (limited by the length- and time-scales of molecular 
dynamics simulations). 
 
3. Classes of Perovskite-Inspired Materials Explored 
Halide perovskites have the general formula ABX3, where A is a monovalent organic or 
inorganic cation, B is an octahedrally coordinated divalent cation, and X is a monovalent halide 
such as Cl, Br, or I. Chemical substitution of Pb2+ for alternative, less-toxic B-site cations has 
been widely explored. However, the perovskite crystal structure can only be maintained if the 
cation has a +2 oxidation state and if the ionic radius can fit within the crystal structure. The 
latter is described by the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, 𝑡 = 
(𝑟𝐴+𝑟𝑋)
√2(𝑟𝐵+𝑟𝑋), where 𝑟𝐴, 𝑟𝐵, and 𝑟𝑋 are 
the ionic radii of the A, B, and X site ions, respectively. Empirically, stable perovskite structures 
have t ranging from 0.8-1.1 [106], which can only be achieved by a limited number of 
compositions [107]. Substitution of Pb(II) for other metal Group 14 cations with sufficiently 
large ionic radii (e.g., Sn2+ and Ge2+) can result in t values within the required range, forming 
perovskite structures (i.e., ASnX3 and AGeX3), as shown in Figure 12. An alternative that39
allows metal cations without a stable +2 oxidation state to be used is to combine a monovalent 
and trivalent cation (e.g., Ag+ and Bi3+), which occupy alternating octahedra, to form double 
perovskites. But beyond identifying materials with perovskite crystal structures, efforts have 
also focused on the inverse design of defect-tolerant materials, as described in Section 2.  
 
Figure 12. The geometric tolerance factors of three classes of perovskites with different B-site 
cations based on their ionic radii [107–109].  
 
This section discusses the synthesis routes and optoelectronic properties of several classes of 
PIMs considered, including Sn- and Ge-based perovskites, double perovskites, as well as other 
potentially defect-tolerant compounds (A3B2X9, ABZ2, binary halides, and V-VI-VII materials). 
Crystal structures and some important features of the PIMs discussed here will be illustrated in 
Figure 13 below and Table 2 at the end of this section, respectively.40
 
Figure 13. Crystal structures of various PIMs discussed in this Review. The axes for the crystal 
structures of each material follows the axes in the upper left corner if not otherwise marked. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [22] (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry), [23] 
(Copyright 2019 Wiley), [24] (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), [25] (Copyright 
2018 American Chemical Society), [26] (Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society), [27] 
(Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemisitry), [28] (Copyright 2007 Elsevier), [110] 
(Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), [111] (Copyright 2020 MDPI), [112] 
(Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry), [113] (Copyright 2009 American Physical 
Society). 
 
3.1 Sn-based perovskites 
As with Pb-based perovskites, Sn-based perovskites can have CH3NH3+ (MA), CH(NH2)2+ 
(FA), Cs+ and other alkali cations in the A-site. Though most Sn-based perovskites have a 
perovskite structure with a high symmetry α cubic phase  (Figure 13), some CsSnX341
perovskites may transform into the γ orthorhombic phase with distorted octahedra at room 
temperature [114], which is mainly due to their smaller tolerance factors. 
 
Although many fabrication methods have been developed for LHPs, these methods are usually 
not directly compatible with their Sn-based counterparts. Sn-based perovskites crystallize 
much faster than Pb-based perovskites due to the lower solubility of SnI2 in typical solvents 
such as N,N – dimethylformamide (DMF) [115]. Therefore, Sn-based perovskite thin films are 
often fabricated by modified solution methods with the addition of reagents to the precursors. 
 
The one-step solution method was first developed by Hao et al.  [116]. It has been found that 
replacing DMF with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the solvent can reduce the crystallization 
rate of Sn-based perovskites by the formation of the intermediate product SnI2 ∙  3DMSO 
(Figure 14a), leading to pinhole-free films [115]. Film morphology has been further enhanced 
using solvent engineering methods (Figure 14b). In this method, perovskite precursors are 
dissolved in mixed solvents, such as -butyrolactone (GBL)/DMSO [117] and GBL/1-methyl-
2pyrolidinone (NMP) [118]. During spin-coating, a non-polar “antisolvent” is dropped. 
Common antisolvents include toluene and chlorobenzene, which the ionic perovskite 
precursors are insoluble in. Dropping the antisolvent causes the intermediate phase to nucleate 
and form. After annealing, a uniform thin film can be obtained. Faster reaction between 
precursors and following nucleation can significantly improves the uniformity of thin films. 
The morphology of fabricated thin films is also strongly related to the antisolvent used and 
how it is dropped onto the spinning substrate. 
 
Sn-based perovskites can also be fabricated by vapor deposition methods [119, 120], which are 
advantageous for depositing multiple layers of over large areas. For instance, MASnI3 showing42
complete coverage over the substrate has been grown through co-evaporation of MAI and SnI2 
[121]. Vapor deposition can also be combined with solution deposition to make films with 
higher quality. For example, low-temperature vapor-assisted solution processing (LT-VASP) 
[122] has been developed to deposit ultrasmooth MASnI3 thin films (Figure 14c). Two steps 
were involved in this method. Firstly, SnI2 thin films were spin-coated onto mesoporous TiO2 
substrates. Secondly, the substrates kept at 60 ℃ were placed over MAI powder heated at 150 
℃ and MASnI3 films would then form as MAI was evaporated onto SnI2 films.  
 
Figure 14. The scheme of (a) one-step solution method, (b) solvent engineering method, and 
(c) LT-VASP method. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [29]. Copyright 2018 Wiley. 
 
In addition, some tin-halide additives such as SnF2 and SnCl2 have been introduced into the 
above methods to promote the film quality in many aspects. For example, SnF2 added in CsSnI3 
can reduce the Sn vacancies and enhance the stability of perovskites without changing the 
lattice parameters [123, 124]. On the other hand, SnCl2 may form an ultrathin hole transport43
layer at the ITO/CsSnI3 interface and improve the carrier extraction [125]. 
 
Similar to Pb-based perovskites, Sn-based perovskites also have direct band gaps ranging from 
1.3-2.1 eV with high absorption coefficients of around 104 cm-1 in visible region [126]. Band 
gap tunability is crucial for the design of tandem solar cells, where semiconductors with 
different band gaps are stacked sequentially in order to absorb different regions of the solar 
spectrum. It has been shown that different X-site halides can greatly affect the band gap of Sn-
based perovskites [116, 127]. For instance, the band gap can be tuned from 1.3-3.61 eV from 
by changing the X anion in MASnX3 from I- to Cl-. Also, Sn/Pb hybrid perovskites were found 
to exhibit significant band gap bowing, where the alloy band gaps are smaller than the band 
gap of both end compounds. Recently, MA(Pb1-xSnx)I3 has demonstrated a band gap below 1.2 
eV at x = 0.5 [128]. Goyal et al. showed through computations that this extraordinary feature 
is primary due to the energy mismatch between the s and p orbitals between Sn and Pb and 
their non-linear mixing (Figure 15) [129].  
 
Figure 15. Schematic illustration of band gap bowing in MA(Pb1-xSnx)I3 using a molecular 
orbital diagram to approximate the band structure of the crystal. Reprinted with permission 
from  Ref. [129]. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
 
Sn-based perovskites tend to become p-type due to the self-doping. Although the oxidation of44
Sn2+ to Sn4+ should release electrons (n-doping), the lower formation energies of Sn vacancies 
[130] and some processes such as the reaction of Sn2+ with O2 may create holes and lead to p-
doping [114]. However, the mechanism behind p-type doping is not fully understood yet. p-
type self-doping leads to high mobilities and metal-like conductivity of Sn-based perovskites. 
Relatively small effective masses (0.01-0.11m0, m0: rest mass of an electron) caused by the 
dispersive VBM further improve their carrier transport. A hole mobility of 585 and 322 cm2 V-
1 s-1 have been reported in CsSnI3 and MASnI3 polycrystalline ingots, respectively [130, 131], 
based on Hall-effect and resistivity measurement. Interestingly, Stoumpos et al. claimed that 
the p-type character of Sn-based perovskites is related to the formation of Sn4+ centers, which 
could be suppressed by the introduction of a powerful reducing agent (e.g., H3PO2). Eventually, 
they showed that n-type polycrystalline CsSnI3 and MASnI3 could be obtained and also exhibit 
high electron mobilities of 2320 and 536 cm2 V-1 s-1 (from Hall-effect measurement), 
respectively [131]. 
 
The carrier lifetime has been reported to be 59 ps and 6.6 ns in FASnI3 thin films with 20 mol% 
SnF2 additives and CsSnI3 single crystals [132, 133], respectively. These relatively short carrier 
lifetimes compared to their Pb-based counterparts were mainly related to the electron 
recombination with large background hole densities (1014-1019 cm-3) [130, 134]. However, the 
incorporation of ethylenediammonium (en) or SnF2 in some Sn-based perovskites has been 
found to reduce Sn vacancies and extend carrier lifetimes [135, 136]. For instance, MASnI3 
thin films with 20 mol% SnF2 have shown a lifetime longer than 10 ns, which is almost 5-10 
times of that of pristine MASnI3 [136]. Moreover, the addiction of ZnI2 could even improve 
the carrier lifetimes of FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskites up to ~ 1 μs [137]. The presence of these sub-
gap defects also results in the low PLQEs of Sn-based perovskites. As a result, the PLQEs of 
mixed Pb-Sn perovskites under solar illumination were typically less than 1% [138]. It is worth45
mentioning that even with such short carrier lifetimes, Sn-based perovskites can still exhibit 
long diffusion length over 500 nm [136] mainly due to their high mobilities. 
 
Poor stability is one of the main issues of Sn-based perovskites because Sn2+ are prone to 
oxidation into more stable Sn4+ after exposure to ambient air [29]. A significant reduction in 
PL lifetime was observed in FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 films after one-minute air exposure [137], 
indicating Sn-based perovskites should be encapsulated immediately after fabrication in order 
to maintain their performance. In addition, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showed that 
MASnI3 prepared in air would start to decompose at lower temperature (~150 ℃) compared to 
that prepared in a sealed tube or solution (> 300 ℃) [131], which is related to the presence of 
Sn4+ and liberation of volatile SnI4. Nevertheless, both decomposition temperatures are 
significantly higher than standard testing temperature for solar cells (85 ℃), indicating that 
MASnI3 is thermally stable. 
 
3.2 Ge-based perovskites 
There have been few experimental reports of Ge-based perovskites focusing on AGeX3 (A = 
Cs+, MA+, or FA+), in which X = I- or a mixture of I- and Br-. The Ge-based perovskites 
discussed here exhibit trigonal structure (Figure 13), where the distorted GeX6 octahedra are 
arranged in a corner-sharing pattern with A cations align along the c-axis. 
 
Solution-based methods are used to synthesize most Ge-based perovskites. For example, 
MAGeI3-xBrx (x = 0-0.6) solution could be prepared by dissolving MAI, MABr, and GeI2 in 
DMF [139]. On the other hand, various Ge-based perovskite precipitates can be obtained by 
adding different iodide salts (CsI, MAI, or FAI) into the solution containing HI, H3PO2 and 
GeO2, where H3PO2 and GeO2 acts as the reduction agent and Ge source, respectively [140,46
141]. Ge-based perovskite precipitates can be dissolved into DMF to make solutions, and thin 
films can be fabricated via one-step methods [141] or by using solution engineering methods 
[139] to improve the film qualities. Unsatisfactory solubility of the precursors in polar solvents 
is a limiting factor of synthesizing Ge-based perovskites, which may lead to poorer film 
qualities [141]. 
 
CsGeI3, MAGeI3, and FAGeI3 have direct band gaps varying from 1.6-2.35 eV with increasing 
A cation size [141]. These Ge-based perovskites also have strong absorption in the wavelength 
range between 400 and 600 nm, along with sharp edges. From thermogravimetric (TGA) 
measurements, Ge-based perovskites were found to exhibit high thermal stability since they 
tended to decompose at temperature > 250 ℃ [141]. However, similar to Sn-based perovskites, 
Ge-based perovskites also face stability issues in air, which is attributed to the oxidation of 
Ge2+ to the more stable Ge4+. The tendency of Ge2+ to oxidize is supported by X-ray 
photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements, which show the presence of Ge4+ in the Ge 
2p orbital scan [141]. Under ambient conditions, it was shown the absorption of MAGeI3 thin 
films would drop by over 50% within one day. Kopacic et al. showed that the addition of Br 
into MAGeI3 can improve its ambient stability [139], though the films could only maintain one 
third of its initial absorption after one day.  
 
3.3 Double perovskites 
Although In, Sb and Bi are promising low-toxicity substitutes for Pb (see Section 2), they tend 
to form a +3 oxidation state. Direct substitution of these metal cations into the B-site in 
perovskites would result in a non-perovskite crystal structure forming. This issue can be solved 
by using a double perovskite structure with the general formula: A2B’B”X6, where A and X are 
monovalent cations and halides, respectively. But two Pb2+ cations are replaced by a pair of47
monovalent B’ and trivalent B” cations. This allows charge neutrality to be maintained in a 
perovskite crystal structure, which is then comprised of alternating B’X65- and B”X63- 
octahedra (Figure 13). Examples of B’ cations that have been commonly used experimentally 
include Ag+ and Na+, which are paired with In3+, Sb3+ or Bi3+ B” cations. Although double 
perovskites have a 3D crystal structure, in some cases, the [B’X6]5- octahedra do not contribute 
to the density of states at the band-edges and result in 0D electronic dimensionality [75], which 
may lead to large indirect band gaps and hinder carrier transport. Due to this reduced electronic 
dimensionality, effective masses for double perovskites usually display anisotropic behavior, 
though most calculated values are still small (between 0.1-0.5 m0) [23]. 
 
Double perovskites can be synthesized through solution processing methods. For instance, 
polycrystalline Cs2AgBiX6 can be obtained by dissolving AgX, BiX3, and CsX in hydrohalic 
acid HX/hypophosphorous acid mixed solvents [142]. Double perovskite thin films can then 
be fabricated via spin-coating or thermal evaporation of as-synthesized powders [143]. On the 
other hand, the synthesis of hybrid halide double perovskites is more difficult compared to that 
of inorganic double perovskites owing to the low decomposition and vaporization energies of 
the organic precursors. Therefore, most hybrid double perovskites were synthesized either by 
solid-state reaction or hydrothermal methods [144, 145], though these two synthesis routes can 
apply to other inorganic double perovskites as well [142, 146]. Apart from the bulk crystals, 
double perovskites can be also synthesized as nanocrystals through hot-injection methods. For 
example, Cs2AgBiBr6 nanocrystals would form when Cs-oleate is injected into the organic 
solvent (oleic acid or oleylamine) containing BiBr3 and AgNO3 at 200 ℃ [147]. The impurities 
can be reduced by introducing additives (e.g., HBr) as well as controlling the injection 
temperature. Particularly, Cs2AgBiI6 nanocrystals could be obtained via anion-exchange 
process by injecting TMSI to convert Cs2AgBiBr6 nanocrystals into the target material [148],48
even though Cs2AgBiI6 is expected to be thermodynamically unstable compared to 
Cs2AgBiBr6. Double perovskite solutions can be prepared by dissolving the synthesized 
products in solvents, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and films are fabricated by spin-
coating these solutions following annealing processes. Annealing at high temperature or under 
low pressure [149] (low-pressure assisted annealing) can give crystalline films without phase 
impurities. Also, the utilization of antisolvents, such as IPA, during spin-coating has been 
shown to improve film quality and reduce the root-mean square roughness [150]. The main 
challenge for preparing double perovskite samples is the high temperature requirement 
involved in dissolving some insoluble precursors [151] (e.g., AgCl), solid-state reaction [152], 
or annealing process [153]. This challenge may limit the application of double perovskite 
devices on substrates intolerant to high temperature (e.g., ITO glass) or their compatibility with 
other materials. 
 
Most double perovskites have low absorption coefficients (102 – 104 cm-1 in visible region 
[154]) at the band-edge due to an indirect band gap (e.g., Cs2AgBiBr6 or MA2AgBiBr6) or a 
parity forbidden band gap (e.g., Cs2AgInCl6 [155]), which limits their SLMEs. For example, 
Cs2AgBiBr6, which is the most common double perovskite explored experimentally, has an 
SLME of 7.9% [46]. Band gaps of double perovskites range from around 2 to 3.4 eV [148], 
which are too large for PV applications. Band gap engineering is therefore important. Doping 
or elemental substitution can tune the band gaps. Tran et al. demonstrated that the band gaps 
of Cs2Ag(SbxIn1-x)Cl6 can decrease with increased Sb content and experience a transition from 
direct to indirect character [156], which stems from the dominant  p-orbitals contributed by 
Sb3+ for the hybridization at band-edges, as illustrated in Figure 16. In addition, Li et al. showed 
that band gap bowing occurs in Cs2Ag(SbxBi1-x)Br6 [79]. The alloy double perovskites 
exhibited a band gap value of 2.08 eV at x = 0.9, which is smaller than Cs2AgSbBr6 (2.18 eV)49
and Cs2AgBiBr6 (2.25 eV). The mechanism for band gap bowing is similar to that of MA(Pb1-
xSnx)I3 (refer to Section 3.1 and Figure 15). That is, the lower band gap exhibited by the alloys 
of Cs2Ag(SbxBi1-x)Br6 is due to the energy mismatch between s and p orbitals from Bi and Sb 
cations, and their non-linear mixing. 
 
The investigations of lifetimes and carrier mobilities for double perovskites were mainly 
focused on Cs2AgBiBr6. Though trap densities on the order of 1016 cm-3 are present in 
Cs2AgBiBr6 bulk crystals [157], they can be reduced by thermal annealing  in N2 [158]. 
Annealed Cs2AgBiBr6 thin films have demonstrated long lifetimes of 1.4 μs [154], which is 
approaching that of multi-crystalline Si used in commercial solar cells [159]. However, the 
carrier transport of double perovskites is limited by larger effective masses than in lead-halide 
perovskites, as well as strong electron-phonon coupling (Refer to Section 3.9). Consequently, 
Cs2AgBiBr6 single crystals were found to simply exhibit moderate mobilities of 11.81 cm2 V-
1 s-1 [158].  
 
Cs2AgBiBr6 can maintain a stable phase in ambient air (with a relative humidity of ~60%) and 
in the dark for 3 months [158], though significant surface discoloration can be observed after 
15 days of light exposure, which possibly stems from the photosensitivity of silver [160]. TGA 
results also showed that Cs2AgBiBr6 has higher thermal stability of up to 430 ℃, while 
(MA)2AgBiBr6 would decompose at around 277 ℃ [145] due to its organic A-site cations. 
Particularly, double perovskites such as Cs2InBiX6, Cs2CuInX6 or Cs2AgInX6 that include Cu+, 
or In+ as B’-site cations have been confirmed theoretically to be relatively unstable owing to 
the small ionic radii, higher d orbital levels, and redox tendency of these B’ cations [161, 162].50
 
Figure 16. (a) Model band diagrams for Cs2AgSbxIn1-xCl6 and (b) illustration of how the band 
gap changes due to the contributions from In 5s and Sb 5p orbitals in the conduction band. 
Reprinted with permission from  Ref. [156]. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 
3.4 Chalcogenide perovskites 
Chalcogenide perovskites also have the ABX3 chemical formula, but have the X-site anions 
replaced by S2-. Owing to their stable crystal structure and smaller band gaps (1.5-2 eV), 
BaZrS3, SrZrS3, LaYS3 are materials investigated most among chalcogenide perovskites. Due 
to the small electronegativity between B-site cations and sulfur, these materials tend to have 
strong covalent B-X bonding elements, which is beneficial to narrowed band gaps and carrier 
transport. The stronger Coulombic attraction between A2+ and [BS6]8- can also enhance the 
ambient stability of chalcogenide perovskites. For example, it has also been shown that both 
BaZrS3 and SrZrS3 samples stored in air showed no significant degradation in structure and 
physical properties after one year. It is worth mentioning that the -2 charge of the X-site anion 
now allows B-site cations that are more stable in +4 oxidation state to be used (e.g., Sn4+ and51
Ge4+). As shown in Figure 13, BaZrS3 exists in distorted perovskite phase with corner sharing 
BX6 octahedra. SrZrS3 may form similar distorted perovskite phase (β phase) or needle-like 
phase with edge-sharing BX6 octahedra (α phase) at room temperature depending on the 
synthesis routes. The crystal structure of LaYS3 is different from 3D perovskite since the 
oxidation states of A- and B-sites are both 3+. Therefore, LaYS3 tend to form a 2D structure 
with [Y3S9]9- layers extended in the [bc] plane and separated by La3+ ions.  
 
Phase pure BaZrS3 can be obtained by sulfurization of BaZrO3 with CS2 at 1050 ℃ for 4 hours 
[163]. Alternatively, heating the stochiometric mixtures of ground and cold-pressed BaS and 
ZrS2 at 800-1000 ℃ for 15 hours under high vacuum can also make BaZrS3 product, though 
further purification will be required [164]. Niu et al. also made BaZrS3 powders by heating 
BaS, Zr, and sulphur pieces with stochiometric quantities in a quartz tube at 600 ℃ for 60 
hours [165]. I2 was introduced in this method to act as a catalyst to enhances the reactivity of 
transition metals. Experimentally, BaZrS3 has direct band gaps of 1.75-1.85 eV [26, 164] with 
large absorption coefficients was on the order of 105 cm-1 from UV to visible range. Ti-alloying 
has been found to effectively reduce the band gap of BaZrS3 to 1.51 eV [166], resulting a 
theoretical conversion efficiency up to 32%. BaZrS3 was found to exhibit n-type characteristic 
with high carrier density between 1019-1020 cm-3, which may arise from excess electrons 
released when S vacancies form [167]. The Hall mobilities of BaZrS3 thin films were reported 
to range from 2.1 to 13.7 cm2 V-1 s-1 [167], which have been comparable to those of MAPbI3 
[168]. The higher mobilities also correspond to larger grain size and better crystallinity of 
BaZrS3 thin films sulfurized at higher temperature. In addition, a PL at the wavelength 
accounting for the band gap and a lifetime of around 400 ns were observed in BaZrS3 thin films 
[165, 167], indicating relatively lower defect density within this material.52
SrZrS3 can be synthesized via mixing SrS, Zr and sulfur at stoichiometric quantities along with 
iodine as catalyst in a quartz tube [165].  α-SrZrS3 and β-SrZrS3 would be obtained after heating 
the mixture at 850 and 1100 ℃ for 60 hours, respectively. A similar synthesis process was 
conducted by heating Sr, Zr powders and sulfur at 850 and 1000 ℃ for 3 weeks to prepare α-
SrZrS3 and β-SrZrS3, respectively [169]. α-SrZrS3 and β-SrZrS3 individually exhibits a direct 
band gap of around 1.53 and 2.05-2.13 eV, and both phases have large absorption coefficients 
on the order of 104 −105 cm-1 in the UV to visible range [26, 165]. Especially, polycrystalline 
β-SrZrS3 showed a high PL intensity comparable to that of single crystalline CdSe and InP and 
its highest EQE is even higher than that of CIGS solar cells [165]. A high VOC was thus 
expected in SrZrS3-based solar cells based on these features. 
 
LaYS3 thin films can be fabricated by the two-step process [26]. At the first step, La and Y 
atoms were deposited on a substrate via co-sputtering in order to form LaY films. The second 
step is to sulfurize the deposited LaY films at 950-1000 ℃ with a H2S flow at atmospheric 
pressure. Crovetto et al. showed that the introduction of O2 at the first step could result in LaY 
films with improved morphology and fewer impurities. LaYS3 thin films were found to display 
a band gap of 2 eV with absorption coefficients on the order of 104 −105 cm-1 in the UV to 
visible range [26]. LaYS3 films also showed a PL intensity higher than that of high-efficiency 
CZTS thin films, implying their lower defect densities [26]. However, based on the time-
resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurement, LaYS3 films demonstrated a low 
mobility of only 0.009 cm2 V-1 s-1 (lower limit) and a relatively long carrier lifetime of 30 ns 
(upper limit) [170]. These results could be attributed to the presence of highly localized defect 
states, which has been observed in spatially resolved PL images [170]. Additionally, LaYS3 
was found to be an n-type material with a low doping density (~1014 cm-3) and similar band 
position with MAPbI3 [170].53
 
Complicated processing and the high processing temperatures are two of the main challenges 
for synthesizing chalcogenide perovskites and integrating them with other transport layers, 
where contact materials may diffuse into active layers and form unwanted materials after 
heating [170]. Consequently, although many potential chalcogenide perovskites have been 
predicted theoretically, most of them are not yet realized experimentally. 
 
3.5 A3B2X9 materials 
Owing to the low toxicity and the similar electron configuration with Pb2+, Bi3+ and Sb3+ might 
serve as alternatives for the B-site cations in perovskites. To satisfy charge balance, however, 
an A3B2X9 arrangement would be needed. These A3B2X9 materials can be considered as defect-
ordered perovskites, where only 2/3 of the B-site cations of the perovskites are occupied, thus 
forming an A3B2X9 structure. These A3B2X9 materials have been found to form two 
polymorphs. One is the 0D dimer-phase structure consisting of isolated bioctahedral clusters, 
while the other is 2D layered structure, which forms from general ABX3 arrangement with the 
removal of every third B layer along the crystal axis (Figure 13). While some materials have a 
fixed structure, other materials (e.g., Cs3Sb2I9) have been found to capable of switching 
between 0D and 2D structures depending on the processing and composition [171, 172]. 
Several A3B2X9 materials have been investigated as potential absorber layers in future PV 
devices. These include (i) 0D: MA3Bi2X9 (X = Cl, Br, I), FA3Bi2I9, Cs3Bi2I9, K3Bi2I9, Rb3Bi2I9, 
and (NH4)3Bi2I9, (ii) 0D/2D: Cs3Sb2I9, (iii) 2D: MA3Sb2I9, Rb3Sb2I9, and K3Sb2I9. 
 
Most A3B2I9 materials can be synthesized via solution processing methods, which resemble 
those used for preparing LHPs. For instance, MA3Bi2I9 solutions can be prepared by mixing 
MAI and BiI3 in DMF/DMSO mixed solvents [173, 174]. A3B2X9 films can be fabricated54
through spin-coating followed by annealing or solvent engineering methods [24, 175] to 
promote film crystallization. Some modified methods can be applied to further improve film 
quality. For instance, the PL lifetime of MA3Bi2I9 films can be extended by using vapor-
assisted conversion, where high-quality MA3Bi2I9 films would form by exposing BiI3 films to 
MAI vapor [176]. Various A3B2X9 powders can also be prepared by solid-state synthesis, 
where AX and BX3 powders can react to form A3B2X9 product under ball-milling [177]. To 
grow A3B2X9 single crystals, the Bridgman method is a common synthesis route. In this 
method, precursors are sealed in an ampoule and placed into in a two-zone furnace, where raw 
materials would melt in the hot-zone and crystallize in the cold-zone [178]. Other than these 
general methods, some 0D phase materials can also be synthesized by different methods. 
(NH4)3Bi2I9 single crystals would precipitate when heating (NH4)I in a mix of BiI3/HI for 3 
hours. Also, high-quality Rb3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9 powders could be obtained by solvothermal 
reactions [179]. Particularly, for materials that can transform between the 0D and 2D phase, 
2D polymorphs are usually more desirable for optoelectronic applications since their stacked 
planes can exhibit higher mobilities. Therefore, although 0D Cs3Sb2I9 can be easily synthesized 
by simple solution processing with antisolvent engineering, more researchers have worked on 
achieving 2D Cs3Sb2I9 via various routes. Singh et al. employed a vapor-assisted solution 
processing method to deposit 2D Cs3Sb2I9 films [180], which were annealed inside an enclosed 
bottle filled with SbI3 vapor to prevent the decomposition of material, as illustrated in Figure 
17. A similar synthesis was taken in 2D Rb3Sb2I9 films [181] as well. Umar et al. also found 
that HCl could be used as a coordinated additive to promote the formation of 2D phase Cs3Sb2I9 
[182]. Recently, another approach found to favor the formation of the 2D phase of Cs3Sb2I9 
was to alloy with Cl [171]. In addition, by alloying with smaller halides, such as Cl or Br, 0D 
Cs3Bi2I9 was found to be transformed into 2D polymorphs [183, 184] , where a complete anion 
ordering has been shown in some work [183].  2D Cs3Bi2I6Br3 has been prepared by heating55
the DMF/DMSO mixture solvent containing stoichiometric mixtures of CsI, BiI3, and BiBr3 
[185]. On the other hand, 2D Cs3Bi2I6Cl3 ingots can be synthesized via a stoichiometric melt 
reaction of CsCl with BiI3 at 750 ℃ [184]. 
 
Figure 17. The scheme of vapor-assisted solution-processed method. Reprinted with 
permission from [180]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 
Although A3B2X9 materials generally have wide band gaps larger than 1.9 eV, large absorption 
coefficients of up to 105 cm-1 in the UV-visible region (wavelength < 600 nm) have been 
presented in some of them (e.g., Cs3Sb2I9 and MA3Bi2I9 [172, 173]). In addition, materials in 
distinct phases can also demonstrate different band gap characteristic. For instance, it has been 
shown that 2D Cs3Sb2I9 exhibits a direct band gap of 2.05 eV, while its 0D polymorph has an 
indirect band gap of 2.4 eV [172]. In addition, 2D Cs3Bi2I6Br3 also shows a reduced band gap 
of 2.03 eV compared with that of 0D Cs3Bi2I9 (2.2 eV), which is related to a transition in crystal 
structures [185]. A gradual decrease in band gap from over 2.6 eV to 2.06 eV has been observed 
in 0D Cs3Bi2Br9 when alloyed with iodide (Cs3Bi2Br9-xIx). This in turn transformed the 0D 
material into 2D Cs3Bi2Br3I6 [183].  
 
Apart from MA3Bi2I9 and (NH4)3Bi2I9 single crystals, which have demonstrated a high mobility 
of 70 cm2 V-1 s-1 (hole mobility based on the Hall-effect measurement) and 213 cm2 V-1 s-1 
(sum mobility based on the SCLC method), respectively [186, 187], most A3B2X9 materials 
suffer from poor carrier transport due to the strong electron-phonon coupling (refer to Section56
3.9) and their low dimensional crystal structures, where carriers can be trapped within the 
isolated regions of materials. Not surprisingly, 0D A3B2X9 materials usually have lower carrier 
mobilities than the 2D ones. For example, based on the space charge limited current (SCLC) 
method, 0D Cs3Bi2I9 single crystals showed a hole mobility on the order of 10-2 cm2 V-1 s-1 
[188], while 2D MA3Sb2I9 single crystals were found to have an electron and hole mobility 
over 10 cm2 V-1 s-1 (or over 40 cm2 V-1 s-1 with Sn doping) [189, 190]. Similar differences can 
be observed between 0D and 2D Cs3Sb2I9. It has been verified by the SCLC method that 2D 
Cs3Sb2I9 thin films have a hole mobility of 6.81 cm2 V-1 s-1, which is almost double that in 0D 
polymorphs [182]. In addition, carrier transport in low dimensional materials can experience 
significant anisotropy along different axes. For instance, estimated mobility-lifetime (μτ) 
product could vary by over two times under the photoconductivity measurement along b- and 
c-axis of MA3Bi2I9 single crystals [186]. Additionally, the low dimensionality also leads to 
large exciton binding energies since excitons could be trapped as well. The exciton binding 
energies in most A3B2X9 materials have been estimated to vary from 70 to 270 meV [24, 173], 
which are significantly larger than those reported from Pb-based perovskites (25-50 meV) 
[191, 192] and could make carrier extraction from these materials relatively challenging.  
 
Several A3B2X9 materials have shown promising carrier lifetimes. Evaluating from its μτ 
product, single crystalline MA3Bi2I9 and (NH4)3Bi2I9 may have carrier lifetimes up to 40 and 
>51.6 μs, respectively [186, 187]. Also, a PL lifetime of 271 ns was reported in MA3Sb2I9 
single crystals [189]. The different polymorphs of Cs3Sb2I9 were also found to have different 
carrier lifetimes due to differences in their defect densities. Based on the SCLC model, 2D 
Cs3Sb2I9 was found to have a trap density of 1.1 × 1015 cm-3, which is almost five times 
smaller than that of 0D Cs3Sb2I9 [182]. Furthermore, 2D Cs3Sb2I9 also shows a lower Urbach 
energy (134 meV) in comparison with 0D Cs3Sb2I9 (162 meV), which verifies its less57
structurally disordered feature [180] (although these values are still significantly higher than 
that of Pb-based perovskites (~15 meV [193])). However, only a PL lifetime of 6 ns has been 
reported in 2D Cs3Sb2I9 single crystals [180], which is shorter than that of 0D Cs3Sb2I9 thin 
films (54.29 ns) [24]. This result may be related to the presence of deep-level states in 2D 
Cs3Sb2I9 [172]. 
 
A3B2I9 materials are found to be stable in air. The absorption spectra of Cs3Bi2I9 and MA3Bi2I9 
show negligible changes after one-month storage in dry air in the dark [173]. TGA 
measurements also shows that MA3Bi2I9 and (NH4)3Bi2I9 hardly decomposes until 250 ℃ and 
240 ℃ [174, 176], respectively, indicating they are thermally stable as well. However, though 
the PXRD patterns for Cs3Bi2I9 in ambient atmosphere could maintain unchanged for a few 
months, that of K3Bi2I9 could not keep well after a few hours, which implies that the larger 
cation sizes may strengthen the stability of crystal structures [179].  
 
3.6 ABZ2 materials 
ABZ2 materials here refer to ternary chalcogenides, where A = Na, Ag, Cu and other cations 
with stable +1 charge states, and B-site cations and Z-site anions are generally Sb/Bi and S/Se. 
These materials are expected to be promising in PV application due to their usage of earth-
abundant and non-toxic elements. In this section, we will mainly focus on the discussion of 
NaBiS2, NaSbS2, AgBiS2, CuSbS2, and CuSbSe2, which have been experimentally 
investigated. Among these materials, NaBiS2, NaSbS2, and AgBiS2 have a rock salt structure 
with mixed cations octahedrally coordinated by anions (Figure 13). Interestingly, different 
cation ratios can lead to various superstructures known as “coloring patterns”, which can 
change their crystal structures and band gaps [25]. Instead of a rock salt structure, CuSbS2 and 
CuSbSe2 exhibits layered orthorhombic structure composed of SbZ5 units (Figure 13).58
 
NaBiS2 can be obtained by melt synthesis [194], in which powders of S, Bi, and Na2S are 
mixed in a sealed tube, followed by a series of heating steps at high temperature for very long 
reaction time (~9 days). The hydrothermal method [195] can reduce the reaction time by 
heating Bi(NO3)3∙5H2O, L-cysteine and NaOH in an autoclave at high temperature for around 
3 days. Solution-based routes have also been used. For instance, Rosales et al. used S, NaH, 
and triphenylbismuth as precursors, and NaBiS2 nanocrystals (NCs) with different sizes can be 
synthesized with different solvents and reaction parameters [25]. Particularly, NaBiS2 quantum 
dots (QDs) can be synthesized by the successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) 
technique [196], where QD sizes can be controlled by different concentrations of the precursor 
solution. NaBiS2 has been found to have an indirect band gap of about 1.2-1.45 eV, in 
agreement with computations [25]. Absorption measurements of NaBiS2 QDs under different 
conditions showed that their band gaps increase with the decrease of QD sizes, implying the 
quantum confinement effect of this material [196], which occurs when QD sizes become 
comparable with the excitonic Bohr radius of the material. Also, large extinction coefficients 
over 104 cm-1 M-1 in visible region [25] shows the great potential of NaBiS2 NCs on PV 
application. On the other hand, Zhong et al. theoretically proved that NaBiS2 is a ferroelectric 
material with a large polarization (~33 μC cm-2) [197], which may improve the carrier 
separation by strong induced field. 
 
NaSbS2 thin films can be synthesized through spray pyrolysis [198], where the precursor 
solution (Na2S and Sb2S3 in water) is sprayed onto a substrate heated at 230 ℃ to reacted into 
products. Also, NaSbS2 QDs can be deposited on the mesoporous TiO2 electrodes via 
Successive Ionic Layer Adsorption and Reaction (SILAR) followed by post-annealing 
procedure [199]. NaSbS2 has an indirect band gap of around 1.5-1.8 eV along with large59
absorption coefficients of  about 104-105 cm-1 in the visible range [198, 199]. Rahayu et al. 
showed that the overall band gap of QDs-coated TiO2 will decrease significantly with the 
increase of SILAR cycles, which is also a result of quantum confinement effect [200]. In 
addition, Xia et al. used UPS and Hall effect measurements to demonstrate that NaSbS2 is a 
weakly n-type material with an electron mobility between 14 to 22 cm2 V-1 s-1 [198].  
 
AgBiS2 has been synthesized via several methods in the literature. Earlier reports were usually 
based on SILAR methods [201] and spray pyrolysis [202]. In addition, AgBiS2 has been grown 
as nanocrystals (NCs) by hot injection method [203] involving the rapid injection of a sulfur 
source into the oleic acid solution containing bismuth and silver salts at high temperature. 
However, hot injection needs to be performed under vacuum, or within inert gas, which is 
inconvenient and costly. Some researchers thus worked on preparing AgBiS2 NCs at room 
temperature and under ambient atmosphere. Pejova et al. showed that AgBiS2 NCs could be 
easily synthesized through dissolving AgNO3, Bi(NO3)3, and Na2S2O3 in nitric acid, and NC 
sizes could be reduced under high-intensity ultrasonic irradiation [204]. Recently, Akgul et al. 
used air-stable precursors such as AgI and BiI3 dissolved in amines, and AgBiS2 NCs would 
form after quickly injecting another sulphur-amine solution [205]. AgBiS2 has been found to 
have indirect band gaps of about 1.15-2.7 eV, and exhibits high absorption coefficients of 
around 104-105 cm-1 from visible to near-infrared range [203]. Similar to NaBiS2, tunable band 
gaps have been observed in AgBiS2 QDs with different sizes [201]. This tunability is also 
ascribed to the quantum confinement effect when QD sizes approached the excitonic Bohr 
radius of AgBiS2 (4.6 nm [206]). AgBiS2 also displays disperse band-edges and hence small 
effective carrier masses [206], which should favor carrier transport. However, only a small 
carrier mobility less than 0.1 cm2 V-1 s-1 and a short diffusion length of 150 nm were reported 
for AgBiS2 NC thin films by the TRMC method [207]. These poor performances may be60
resulted from the presence of deep-level defects, which has been predicted to arise from the 
minor off-stoichiometry of AgBiS2 NCs [208]. Nevertheless, an extremely long carrier lifetime 
up to 1.67 ms was still seen in AgBiS2 QD thin film based on photoconductivity measurement 
[209], implying that the defect physics of this material is not yet fully understood. 
 
CuSbS2 thin films can be fabricated by many techniques including thermal evaporation [210], 
sputtering [211], chemical bath deposition (CBD) [212], electrodeposition [213], ALD [214], 
solvothermal synthesis [215] and so on. On the other hand, solvothermal [216] and hot injection 
methods [217] can be also applied on the synthesis of CuSbS2 nanoparticles. This material has 
been shown to have large absorption coefficients over 104 cm-1 in the visible region as well as 
direct band gaps ranging from around 1.4-1.9 eV, depending on various deposition processes 
[218–220]. DFT calculation also predicted that CuSbS2 tends to exhibit p-type characteristic 
owing to the presence of dominant Cu vacancies [221] acting as electron acceptors. It also 
exhibits small carrier effective masses of around 0.3 m0 [221], leading to a high hole mobility 
of 64.6 cm2 V-1 s-1 [222]. Yang et al.’s work also demonstrated that CuSbS2 may be defect 
tolerant owing to higher formation enthalpies for deep-level defects and the shallow transition 
level of Cu vacancies [221]. However, CuSbS2 thin films were found to have a carrier lifetime 
of only 0.7 ns even after the improvement on film quality via thermal treatment [223, 224]. 
 
CuSbSe2 thin films can be deposited through evaporation [225], co-sputtering of Cu2Se and 
Sb2Se3 [226], sulfurization of Cu-Sb alloy [220], and electrodeposition [227]. Particularly, 
Yang et al. also fabricated CuSbSe2 by the hydrazine method, which involved the preparation 
of precursors such as Cu2S, Sb2Se3 in hydrazine with specific stoichiometry [228]. In addition, 
it has been shown that CuSbSe2 single crystals could also be synthesized by the hot-injection 
technique [229]. One main challenge within these methods is that several competitive phases61
may occur concomitantly, making pure phase CuSbSe2 can be obtained only under strictly 
controlled environment [228, 230]. CuSbSe2 has direct band gaps of 1-1.2 eV [228], which is 
close to the optimal band gap for single-junction solar cells. Moreover, Tiwari et al. showed 
that CuSbSe2 also exhibits large absorption coefficients up to 6.6 × 106 cm-1 in the visible 
region [231], indicating its potential as a solar absorber. Similar to CuSbS2, a p-type 
characteristic caused by Cu vacancies is also observed in CuSbSe2 with a high hole 
concentration over 1017 cm-3 being reported [226]. However, the larger effective hole mass (0.9 
m0 [232]) of CuSbSe2 may lead to a lower Hall mobility of 20.17 cm2 V-1 s-1 [233] compared 
to CuSbS2. Though Xue et al. predicted that CuSbSe2 would have benign defect properties 
[233], Welch et al. indicated that Se vacancies could serve as deep-level defect states that may 
influence the carrier lifetime, which has been confirmed by a short carrier lifetime of 190 ps 
measured via transient THz spectroscopy technique [230]. 
 
In terms of stability, it has been claimed that AgBiS2 and NaBiS2 are stable in air for at least 
several weeks [25, 203]. No obvious degradation issues have been reported in the literature for 
other ABZ2 materials, but Peccerillo et al. believed that Cu-related instability resulted from 
ions migration under continuous DC operation may occur in Cu-based ABZ2 materials [234]. 
 
3.7 Binary halides 
Binary halides are compounds made from heavy metals and halides, which contain cations with 
valence s2 electrons, making them promising for potentially exhibiting defect tolerance (refer 
to Section 2). InI, BiI3, and SbI3 have been investigated most as PV materials among all binary 
halides, and we will focus our discussion on them. InI has an orthorhombic crystal structure 
with layers stacked along the b-axis [235] (Figure 13), and every two atom sheets are staggered 
in this structure, making In atoms bonded more closely with adjacent In atoms. On the other62
hand, BiI3 and SbI3 exhibit layered structures [30, 236] with each layer composed of edge-
sharing metal-halide octahedra bonded together by van der Waals interactions. 
 
InI films can be deposited by thermal evaporation [110], or fabricated from the melt [21], where 
the In metal-I pellets mixture was placed into a quartz ampoule and heated at 400 ℃ for 12 
hours to ensure the complete reaction into InI. Alternatively, Shah et al. used the Bridgman 
method to grow InI single crystals by placing purified InI into a vertical furnace kept at 450 ℃ 
but with a sharp temperature drop at the bottom, where melted InI can crystallize as molten InI 
moved down [237]. InI has a direct band gap of around 2 eV, which has been verified in 
calculation and experiment [110]. It has been reported that InI can exhibit reasonably long PL 
lifetime over 6 ns [21] and large mobility-lifetime products corresponding to a diffusion length 
of around 16 μm [110]. Defect calculations also suggest that the main vacancies and anti-site 
defects do not have transition levels resonant within the band gap, or have high formation 
energy transition levels that involve a large gradient change (which would have a low capture 
cross-section) [238]. However, In is not stable in the +1 oxidation state and tends to oxidize to 
the +3 oxidation state. InI films have been found to decompose under ambient conditions 
within 3 hours [110]. 
 
BiI3 thin films have been synthesized by physical vapor transport (PVT) [239], physical vapor 
deposition (PVD) [240], and solution processing [241]. On the other hand, BiI3 single crystals 
can be obtained by the vertical Bridgman method [242] similar to that was described in InI 
section. It is worth noting that BiI3 tends toward dissociation at 250-300 ℃ [243, 244], which 
limits its synthesis to some extent. BiI3 has indirect band gaps of around 1.7-1.8 eV with large 
absorption coefficients (>105 cm-1 above 2 eV) [239, 242]. BiI3 single crystals have 
demonstrated the electron mobility as high as 260 cm2 V-1 s-1 (or 1000 cm2 V-1 s-1 with Sb63
doping) [245, 246], though the hole mobility was estimated to be much lower due to relatively 
large effective hole mass (2.01 m0). Furthermore, a long electron diffusion length of 4.9 μm 
estimated from the large μτ product as well as a PL lifetime of 1.3-1.5 ns was obtained from 
BiI3 single crystals [239], indicating the potential of BiI3 as a great PV material. BiI3 films are 
also stable in air. For instance, Hamdeh et al. have demonstrated that they could stand against 
oxidation for several months or withstand several hours of annealing without degradation [241]. 
In addition, Du et al.’s work showed that the large Born effective charge of BiI3 could result 
in its large dielectric constant of around 54 [247], which can Coulombically screen charged 
defects.  
 
SbI3 single crystalline plates could be grown from vapor phase [248] directly or by Bridgman 
method [249]. Particularly, SbI3 microcrystals could be obtained by the incorporation with Y-
zeolite faujasites via sublimation [249]. In addition, Mohan et al. also fabricated SbI3 films by 
iodizing evaporated Sb films [250]. Kepinska et al. showed that SbI3 has a temperature 
dependent indirect band gap [248], which is around 2.1 eV at room temperature. Virko et al. 
proved that this band gap would be blue-shifted when the deposited SbI3 clusters became 
smaller, which implies the quantum confinement effect of this material [249]. BiI3 also 
demonstrates rather large absorption coefficients in visible region on the order of 105-106 cm-1  
[248]. However, SbI3 single crystals were found to have an Urbach energy over 200 meV at 
room temperature [248], indicating that several defect states may exist within the band gap. 
 
3.8 V-VI-VII materials 
V-VI-VII materials are materials made from elements of V, VI, and VII group, which may be 
Bi/Sb, O/S/Se, and halides, respectively. Similar to binary halides, V-VI-VII materials also 
have antibonding orbital character at the band-edges along with strong spin-orbit coupling,64
which are therefore promising for potentially exhibiting defect tolerance. At present, BiOI, 
BiSI, and SbSI are the compounds studied the most. Both BiOI and BiSI have a layered 
structure (matlockite tetragonal system [251, 252]), where I-Bi-O/S-Bi-I layers are stacked 
along the c-axis and linked by weak van der Waals interactions (Figure 13). On the other hand, 
SbSI has a needle-like crystal structure with long chains growing along the (001)-axis [253]. 
Strong anisotropy can be seen in V-VI-VII materials due to their low dimensionality and may 
be reflected in many features. For example, the effective hole mass can differ by over 3 times 
as along different axes of BiOI [252], which also leads to the anisotropy in its carrier transport. 
 
BiOI polycrystalline thin films can be fabricated by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) [254, 
255] or the SILAR technique [256]. Owing to the 2D structure, BiOI thin films exhibit a 
textured morphology. For example, CVD BiOI grown on solution-processed NiOx have a {012} 
preferred orientation. It was recently shown that this could be controlled through the 
vaporization temperature of the BiI3 precursor and the growth temperature, which influence 
whether growth is nucleation or kinetically-dominated [257]. The preferred orientation of BiOI 
films can then be changed from a/b-axis to c-axis, which results in a denser morphology. 
 
BiOI has an indirect band gap of 1.8-1.9 eV with absorption coefficients larger than 104cm−1 
from UV to visible range [254, 258]. Computed defect diagrams showed that the defects with 
the lowest formation energy have shallow transition levels [254], which was consistent with 
experiments. It has been showed that the electronic structure, PL intensity and charge-carrier 
lifetime are robust against percent-level defects [259].  Furthermore, a high dielectric constant 
of 45 was found through computations [254], and this can help to screen charged defects. The 
PL lifetime measured was 2.7 ns [254]. Although this is sufficient for further exploration in 
solar absorbers [21], it is shorter than the lifetime of lead-halide perovskites. Recently,65
photoinduced current transient spectroscopy measurements showed that BiOI films have deep 
traps located at 0.3 and 0.6 eV from the band-edge [259], but their origin have not yet been 
identified. BiOI has improved air stability over lead-halide perovskites, with no change in 
phase over the entire 197 day testing period [254]. 
 
BiSI polycrystalline thin films can be synthesized by various methods such as single-precursor 
solution processing [260], spray pyrolysis [261], asynchronous ultrasonic spray pyrolysis 
(APUSP) [262], hydrothermal [263] and solvothermal methods [264]. APUSP here used two 
ultrasonic humidifiers to deliver two nebulized solution onto a hot substrate subsequently to 
improve the film morphology. On the other hand, BiSI single crystals can be synthesized by a 
gel process [265] or the sublimation of BiSI polycrystals [266]. One key challenge of 
depositing BiSI films is the competition from other Bi-S-I phases [267], which is verified from 
the isothermal section of this ternary system. BiSI has a nearly direct band gap of around 1.6 
eV with absorption coefficients of around 104 cm-1 in UV and visible range [261]. Though the 
effective electron mass is small for BiSI [260], Sasaki et al. have shown that this material may 
exhibit an electron drift mobility of only 1 cm2 V-1 s-1 along the c-axis [266]. Moreover, Hahn 
et al. also estimated a mean hole diffusion length of only 5 × 10−6 cm [261], which arises from 
its larger hole effective mass (0.95 m0 [266]). In addition, a short PL lifetime of about 1.03 ns 
was also obtained from BiSI thin films [260], implying the presence of deep-level sulfur 
vacancies. BiSI is also a semiconductor exhibiting ferroelectricity, piezoelectric, 
photoconductivity and hence is an appealing material in various fields [268]. 
 
SbSI films can be prepared by hydrothermal methods [269] or simple solution processing 
methods [270]. In addition, SbSI single crystals can be synthesized via the vertical Bridgeman 
technique [271] or CVT [272]. Due to the anisotropy of SbSI, it is still difficult to fabricate66
large-area and uniform single crystalline samples. SbSI has indirect band gaps of around 2 eV 
[270, 273], which may be blue-shifted when the temperature decreases [271]. The 
ferroelectricity of SbSI also leads to the large static dielectric constant of the order of 104 at 
292 K [274], which is beneficial for screening charged defects. In addition to the 
ferroelectricity, SbSI also has high photoconductivity and piezoelectricity [275] and is as 
appealing as BiSI.  
 
3.9 Strong electron-phonon interaction and self-trapped excitons 
Although Sn-based perovskites have demonstrated high mobilities exceeding 500 cm2 V-1 s-1 
in single crystals [168], the mobilities of other PIMs are more modest. This is partly due to less 
dispersive bands being present in many cases, particularly compounds with layered, 1D or 0D 
structures. But another important factor is electron-phonon coupling. Charge carriers could 
couple with phonons (the quanta of lattice vibrations) by polarizing the intrinsic ions inside 
lattices, inducing a localized structural distortion. Meanwhile, the movement of charge carriers 
would be constrained by the distortions, and the term polarons could be used to describe the 
charge carrier coupled to the distorted crystal vibrations. It has been verified that strong 
electron-phonon coupling occurs in A3B2X9 materials [178], double perovskites [276, 277], 
and binary halides [278]. Owing to these materials being polar, Fröhlich interactions are 
expected to occur, in which the charge-carriers couple to longitudinal optical (LO) phonons 
[279]. Optical phonons involve out-of-phase lattice movements, which results in an electric 
field due to electric polarization that interacts with the charge-carrier [280]. The strength of 
coupling is described by a dimensionless coupling constant, , which is given by Eq. 5 [281]:  
𝛼=
𝑞2
ℏ𝑐√
𝑚𝑏𝑐2
2ℏ𝜔𝐿𝑂(
1
𝜀∞−
1
𝜀0)                                                                                                                                          (5)67
In Eq. 5, q is the charge of an electron,  ℏ the reduced Planck constant, c the speed of light, mb 
the effective mass of the charge-carrier in the absence of lattice interactions,  LO the rotational 
frequency of the longitudinal optical phonon mode, and  and 0 the optical and static 
dielectric constants, respectively [281]. A coupling constant larger than 2 is considered to be 
strong, and larger coupling constants result in the effective mass of the polaron being larger, 
thereby significantly limiting the mobilities. In Cs2AgBiBr6, the Fröhlich coupling constant has 
been calculated to be 2.54 for electrons and 2 for holes [276], showing electron-phonon 
coupling to be strong. This can also be quantified through the Huang-Rhys factor, S, which 
indicates the average number of vibrations emitted after an optical transition between excited 
and ground states [276]. The Huang-Rhys factor for Cs2AgBiBr6 has been measured to be high, 
at 11.7 – 15.4 [276, 282]. As a result, the mobilities of Cs2AgBiBr6 single crystals has been 
measured to only reach 11.81 cm2 V-1 s-1, well below lead- and tin-based perovskites [154, 
168]. Beyond reducing the mobility, Fröhlich interactions also result in a temperature-
dependent widening in the photoluminescence peak [279]. 
 
Excitons can also interact with phonons. This coupling is similar to electron-phonon coupling 
discussed above, but an important difference is that excitons are quasi-particles with no charge. 
Such interactions can result in the exciton localizing in the lattice in the absence of defects due 
to distortions in the lattice [283] (e.g., Jahn-Teller distortions [277]). This is referred to as 
intrinsic self-trapping (Figure 18a). These self-trapped excitons (STEs) can be considered to 
be defect states, but unlike lattice defects, STEs are only created after excitation. Moreover, if 
the exciton occurs in the vicinity of a permanent defect, it will form an extrinsic STE that is 
trapped at different energies compared to those of intrinsic STEs. Schematic images of three 
trapping conditions are displayed in Figure 18a. On top of the restriction to carrier movement, 
multiple excited states relative to the ground state will be also generated as coupling occurs,68
which is illustrated in Figure 18b. These excited states will exhibit a large equilibrium position 
offset relative to the free exciton (FC) state, and this offset is proportional to the Huang-Rhys 
parameter. As a result, a broadband white light emission with large Stokes shift is usually 
observed in the materials  [277, 284]. 
 
Beyond Cs2AgBiBr6, strong coupling has also been identified in A3B2X9 materials. For 
example, Cs3Sb2I9 was found to have a Huang-Rhys factor as high as 42.7. It is proposed that 
this strong electron-phonon coupling resulted in the formation of STEs and in turn gave the 
broad PL peaks observed [178]. Luo et al. fabricated an alloyed Cs2(Ag0.6Na0.4)InCl6 double 
perovskite [277] and observed that its PL showed a linear dependence on the excitation power 
with the PLQEs almost unchanged. This result verified the existence of STEs since permanent 
defects will encounter the saturation effect, where none of carrier transitions occurs after all 
defect states are filled at high power excitations. They also demonstrated that though Na ions 
could break the inversion symmetry of Cs2AgInCl6 and improve the PLQE to some extent, too 
many Na ions might force the excited states to cross ground state, leading to non-radiative 
recombination through phonon emission. Other important features regarding white light 
emission have been investigated in low-dimensional perovskites. For instance, Cortecchia et 
al. indicated that the white light emission intensity will increase at lower temperature due to 
the thermal energy is not comparable to the de-trapping energy (Ea,detrap in Figure 18b), but it 
will decrease when the temperature is down to below ~80 K since the thermal energy is even 
less than self-trapping energy (Ea,trap in Figure 18b). These materials featuring white light 
emission with large Stokes shift will not suffer PL self-absorption and thermal quenching, 
which are suitable for the white light LED applications.69
 
Figure 18. (a) Schematic illustrations of (A) intrinsic self-trapping, which is created as an 
exciton induces a lattice distortion, (B) defect trapping, which is created as an exciton is trapped 
within a permanent defect and (C) extrinsic self-trapping, which is created as an exciton 
induces a lattice distortion near the edge of a permanent defect. Reprinted with permission from 
[283]. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Band diagrams for STE states, where 
FC, FE, and GS refers to the state of free carrier, free exciton, and ground state, respectively. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [284]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.70
Table 2. Important properties of PIMs discussed in this review. RT = room temperature; me*/mh* = the smallest effective electron/hole masses 
reported in the corresponding references; 𝜇/𝜇e/𝜇h= the highest sum/electron/hole mobilities reported in the corresponding references; SC = 
single crystals; PC = polycrystalline ingots; TF = thin films; QD = quantum dots; NC = nanocrystals 
 
Material 
Space group 
@ RT 
m e*/mh* 
(m0) 
Band gaps 
(eV) 
Mobility 
(cm2 V-1 s-1) 
Carrier lifetime 
(ns) 
Highest PCE 
(%) 
Reference 
Sn-based 
perovskites 
MASnI3 
Pm3m 
0.1/0.11 
1.23-1.4 
𝜇h~322 (PC) 
𝜇𝑒~2320 (PC) 
10.2 (TF) 
6.63 
[22, 131, 
136, 285–
288] 
FASnI3 
Amm2 
0.02/0.05 
1.35-1.45 
𝜇h = 67 (TF) 
𝜇e = 103 (PC) 
0.59 (TF) 
12.4 
[131, 132, 
288–291]  
CsSnI3 
Pnma 
0.041/0.069 
1.3 
𝜇h = 585 (SC) 
𝜇e = 356 (PC) 
6.6 (SC) 
3.56 
[125, 130, 
131, 133, 
277, 292] 
Ge-based 
perovskites 
MAGeI3 
R3m 
0.27/0.29 
1.9-2 
- 
- 
0.68 
[139, 293] 
CsGeI3 
R3m 
0.22/0.23 
1.6 
- 
- 
0.11 
[141, 293] 
FAGeI3 
R3m 
0.66/0.76 
2.35 
- 
- 
- 
[293, 294] 
Double 
perovskites 
Cs2AgBiCl6 
Fm3̅m 
0.53/0.15 
2.5-2.77 
- 
- 
- 
[142, 150, 
295] 
Cs2AgBiBr6 
Fm3̅m 
0.37/0.14 
1.95-2.5 
𝜇 ~ 1 (TF) 
𝜇 ~ 11.81 (SC) 
1400 (TF) 
2.84 
[142, 150, 
154, 157, 
158, 296, 
297] 
Cs2NaBiI6 
Fm3̅m 
0.28/0.58 
1.66 
- 
- 
0.42 
[146, 298] 
Cs2AgInCl6 
Fm3̅m 
0.29/0.28 
3.3-3.53 
- 
- 
- 
[150, 299] 
(MA)2AgBiI6 
Fm3̅m 
0.47/0.7 
1.02-1.96 
- 
- 
- 
[150, 300]71
(MA)2AgBiBr6 
R3m 
0.15/0.24 
1.25-2.02 
- 
- 
- 
[145, 301] 
A3B2X9 
materials 
MA3Bi2I9 
C 2/c 
0.54/0.95 
1.94-2.1 
𝜇h = 70 (SC) 
~40000 (SC) 
3.17 
[173, 176, 
177, 186, 
302, 303] 
FA3Bi2I9 
P63mc 
- 
1.85-1.94 
𝜇= 0.224 (TF) 
- 
- 
[177, 304]  
Cs3Bi2I9 
C 2/c 
1/1.1 
1.9-2.2 
𝜇h = 1.7 × 10−2 
(SC-TF) 
𝜇h = 4.4 × 10−7 
(PC-TF) 
- 
3.2 
[173, 175, 
176, 179, 
188, 303] 
(NH4)3Bi2I9 
P 21/n 
- 
2.04-2.05 
𝜇= 213 (SC) 
~51600 (SC) 
- 
[174, 187] 
Cs3Sb2I9 
P63/mmc 
(0D) 
P3̅m1 (2D) 
1.4/1.55 
(0D) 
0.34/0.42 
(2D) 
2.3-2.5 
(0D) 
2.02-2.05 
(2D) 
𝜇h = 6.81  
(2D-TF) 
𝜇h = 3.54  
(0D-TF) 
54.29 (0D-TF) 
6 (2D-TF) 
1.49 
[24, 180, 
182, 305]  
MA3Sb2I9 
P63/mmc 
- 
1.92 
𝜇e~ 𝜇h = 16.68 
(SC) 
271 (SC) 
- 
[189, 190] 
Rb3Sb2I9 
P 21/n 
1.11/1.55 
2-2.24 
𝜇= 0.26 (TF) 
8.97 (TF) 
1.37 
[24, 181, 
306–309] 
K3Sb2I9 
P3̅m1 
3.15/1.83 
2.03 
- 
29.98 (TF) 
- 
[24] 
ABZ2 
materials 
NaBiS2 
Fm3̅m 
0.36/0.25 
1.2-1.45 
- 
- 
0.05 
[25, 196, 
310] 
NaSbS2 
C 2/c 
0.34/0.35 
1.5-1.8 
𝜇e = 14 −22 
(TF) 
- 
3.18 
[198, 200, 
311] 
AgBiS2 
Fm3̅m 
0.35/0.722 
1.15-2.7 
𝜇e = 0.07 (NC) 
𝜇h = 0.032 (NC) 
1670 (QD) 
6.4 
[201, 207, 
209, 312–
314]72
CuSbS2 
Pnma 
~0.3/0.3 
1.4-1.9 
𝜇h = 64.6 (TF) 
0.7 (TF) 
3.22 
[218–220, 
222, 223, 
315] 
CuSbSe2 
Pmna 
0.71/0.9 
1-1.2 
𝜇h = 20.17 (TF) 
0.19 (TF) 
4.7 
[226, 228, 
230, 232, 
233, 316, 
317] 
Binary 
halides 
InI 
Cmcm 
0.215/0.11
8 
2 
- 
6 (SC) 
0.39 
[21, 110, 
235, 318] 
BiI3 
R3̅ 
0.68/2.01 
1.67-1.8 
𝜇e = 260 (SC) 
1.3-1.5 (SC) 
1.21 
[236, 239, 
245, 318, 
319] 
SbI3 
R3̅ 
0.62/1.54 
2.1 
- 
- 
- 
[248, 318, 
320] 
V-VI-VII 
materials 
BiOI 
P4/nmm 
0.19/0.2 
1.8-1.93 
- 
2.7 (SC) 
1.8 
[251, 252, 
254] 
BiSI 
Pnam 
0.53/0.95 
1.57 
𝜇e~1 (SC) 
1.03 (TF) 
1.32 
[260, 266, 
321] 
SbSI 
(approx.) 
P21P21P21 
0.65/0.34 
1.8-2.72 
- 
- 
3.62 
[322–324] 
Chalcogeni
de 
perovskites 
BaZrS3 
Pnma 
0.43/0.75 
1.75-1.85 
𝜇e = 2.1 −13.7 
(TF) 
400 (TF) 
- 
[26, 167, 
325] 
SrZrS3 
Pnma 
3.11/0.64 
1.52-1.53 
(α-phase) 
2.05-2.13 
(β-phase) 
- 
- 
- 
[26, 165, 
169, 325] 
LaYS3 
P21/m 
0.49/0.67 
2 
𝜇~0.009 (TF) 
~30 (TF) 
- 
[26, 170, 
325]73
4. Engineering of Photovoltaic Devices – Strategies and Challenges  
Two common device structures are used: n-i-p and p-i-n. In the n-i-p structure, the active layer 
is grown over an electron transport layer (ETL) covering the transparent conducting oxide.  A 
hole transport layer (HTL) and a high-work function top electrode is deposited over the active 
layer (vice versa for p-i-n). These device structures can be divided into planar and mesoporous 
structures. The planar structure only needs a compact ETL, but the mesoporous structure uses 
a mesoporous scaffold (typically comprised of TiO2 nanoparticles) deposited on a thin compact 
ETL (TiO2 thin film). The active layer will then incorporate into the mesoporous scaffold, 
which improves carrier transfer. These device structures are illustrated in Figure 19. 
 
Figure 19. Illustration of the most common device structures used for perovskite-inspired 
materials. 
 
The stability of PV devices is a critical consideration for commercial applications. However, 
publications usually lack consistency in terms of testing procedures and parameters reported. 
To resolve this issue, protocols have been developed for stability testing. For commercial 
silicon solar cells, the protocol IEC (International Electrochemical Commission) 61215-1-
3:2016 is commonly used (refer to the Introduction) [326]. At the lab level, protocols developed 
by the International Summit on Organic Photovoltaic Stability (ISOS) are commonly used74
[327]. These were initially developed for organic solar cells, but were more recently adopted 
for perovskite solar cells as well. The ISOS protocols are categorized into 5 stress conditions 
(dark storage testing, outdoor testing, light soaking testing, thermal cycling testing, light-
humidity-thermal cycling testing). Additional testing procedures specific to PSCs, such as 
light-dark cycling and testing under continuous bias in the dark, have been added to these 
protocols. It is suggested that the stability of PIM-based solar cells can be evaluated according 
to similar protocols as well to resolve the large discrepancies in testing procedures that are 
present in the literature. 
 
In this section, we will firstly introduce the structures used in PV devices of each class of PIMs 
along with the corresponding device performances and improvements. Next, the device 
stability will be discussed, followed by a brief review on current challenges or limiting factors. 
 
4.1 Sn-based perovskites 
PV devices with Sn-based perovskites have been fabricated in the n-i-p (planar and mesoporous) 
and p-i-n structures. For the planar structure, although the diffusion length of Sn-based 
perovskites can be very long, it is still challenging to make devices based on this structure 
owing to the requirement of high film quality (compact film morphology and low pinhole 
density). Trimethylamine (TMA) was found to be an additive that can improve the film quality 
of FASnI3, and a PCE (power conversion efficiency) of 4.34% with a VOC  (open-circuit voltage) 
of 0.31 V, and a JSC (short-circuit current density) of 21.65 mA cm-2 in planar FASnI3 solar 
cells was achieved [328].  
 
On the other hand, the most common architectures used in Sn-based perovskite PV devices is 
the mesoporous structure. The so-called hollow solar cells based on mesoporous structure were75
found to demonstrate improved performance over planar devices [286, 329]. In these devices, 
ethylenediammonium (en) was incorporated to replace parts of A-site cations in Sn-based 
perovskites, which would create several SnI2 vacancies and change the electronic structures of 
perovskites. As a result, hollow solar cells could demonstrate better film morphology and lower 
defect densities (estimated from the trap-filled limited voltage from SCLC measurement) 
compared to neat solar cells, leading to an improved PCE and VOC. Consequently, hollow 
{en}FASnI3, {en}MASnI3, and {en}CsSnI3 solar cells have shown the highest PCE of 7.23%, 
6.63%, and 3.79%, respectively among mesoporous PV devices [286, 329]. 
 
Several p-i-n Sn-based perovskite solar cells have demonstrated high PCEs. Shao et al. 
fabricated p-i-n FASnI3 solar cells with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene 
sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as the HTL and C60 + 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline 
(BCP) as the ETL, achieving a PCE of 9% with a VOC of 0.53 V, and a JSC of 24.1 mA cm-2 
[330]. Jiang et al. also proposed p-i-n PEAxFA1-xSnI3-x (PEA = C6H5CH2CH2NH3+) solar cells 
with indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) and PEDOT:PSS as the ETL and HTL, respectively [290]. 
They showed that the use of ICBA, which exhibits a lowest unoccupied molecular orbital 
(LUMO) closer to the vacuum level compared to PCBM, could effectively increase the VOC. 
Introducing NH4SCN as an additive to the perovskite can help to reduce defect densities as 
well. As a result, their champion device showed a record PCE of 12.4% and VOC of 0.94 V 
along with a JSC of 17.4 mA cm-2. It should be noted that simpler devices without hole transport 
layers have also been reported. For instance, HTL-free p-i-n CsSnI3 solar cells (with SnCl2 
added to the perovskite to improve film quality) demonstrated a PCE of 3.56%, along with  a 
high fill factor of ~70% [125]. 
 
The efficiency for Sn-based perovskite solar cells is limited by nonradiative recombination76
(with carrier lifetimes < 1 ns for most thin film samples) and unmatched band alignment with 
common transport layers [29]. Other than poor film morphology during processing, the high 
recombination rate of Sn-based perovskites is mainly due to the creation of Sn vacancies from 
self-doping (refer to section 3.1). Recently, it has been shown that the incorporation of 
additives such as enI2 and PEAI [135, 330] or using high-impurity precursors might help to 
decrease the density of these background recombination centers. On the other hand, Sn-based 
perovskites have larger band mismatch to common ETLs and HTLs compared to MAPbI3, as 
shown in Figure 20. This mismatch may impede the carrier extraction and cause the 
recombination loss at the interface of the transport layers and the perovskite layer, which will 
reduce VOC significantly. Searching for transport layers with suitable band-edges is therefore 
important as fabricating Sn-based perovskite solar cells.  
 
Figure 20. Energy diagram of Sn- and Pb-based perovskites along with some common ETLs 
and HTLs. Unit is in eV. The energy levels are estimated from Tauc plots and photoemission 
spectroscopy in air. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [29]. Copyright 2018 Wiley. 
 
Sn-based perovskite solar cells are unstable in air owing to the oxidation of Sn2+, as discussed 
in Section 3.1. Typically, neat Sn-based perovskite solar cells may completely lose their initial77
PCEs in air within a few hours [135, 331, 332]. In addition to processing under an oxygen-free 
or hydrazine-based atmosphere, many works have been attempted a wide range of strategies to 
improve the stability of Sn-based perovskites. For instance, the hollow structures incorporated 
with en [135] or using TMA as additives have been shown to enhance the air stability of FASnI3 
[328]. Recently, solar cells composed of 2D Sn-based perovskites were found to exhibit better 
ambient stability than their 3D counterparts. For example, it has been shown that the PCE of 
2D layered (BA)2(MA)3Sn4I13 (BA: butylammonium) solar cells degraded much slower than 
that of 3D MASnI3 in air [332]. However, no Sn-based perovskite solar cells can retain their 
ambient performances over one day unless proper encapsulation is employed. By encapsulating 
devices with glass and epoxy or glue under inner gas atmosphere, the encapsulated cells could 
extend their device lifetimes up to a few months [333]. 
 
4.2 Ge-based perovskite 
Ge-based perovskite PV devices have been fabricated in the mesoporous and p-i-n structures. 
Krishnamoorphy et al. fabricated various mesoporous Ge-based perovskite solar cells by using  
2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) as 
the HTL [141]. However, the PCEs of mesoporous CsGeI3 and MAGeI3 solar cells are limited 
by their low VOC in the mV range, which is far below the band gaps.   
 
Champion Ge-based perovskite solar cells were based on the p-i-n structure with PEDOT:PSS 
as HTL and PC70BM as ETL. Kopacic et al. showed that the efficiency and stability of p-i-n 
structured MAGeI3 solar cells could be improved with the substitution of a few percent of 
bromine [139]. Consequently, the optimal device with MAGeI2.7Br0.3 demonstrated a record 
PCE of 0.68% along with an improved VOC of 460 mV.78
There are currently few reports of Ge-based perovskite PV devices mainly due to their limited 
stability, as discussed in section 3.2. Even MAGeI2.7Br0.3 solar cells with improved stability 
still lose two-thirds of their initial performance in air within a few hours after preparation [139]. 
It has also been claimed that the formation of 2D perovskites with the addition of bulky cations 
such as PEA+  [331] could be a promising solution to address this issue.  
 
Ge-based perovskite PV devices also suffer from low VOCs, which limits PCEs, and which are 
arise in part due to the high density of defect states during the oxidation of Ge2+.  Improved 
synthesis methods would be needed to address this issue, but the poor solubility of some 
precursors in most polar organic solvents is also a challenge that needs to be overcome. 
Krishnamoorthy et al. proposed that preparation methods without the addition of 
hypophosphorous acid as well as the strict control of synthesis environment and precursors 
may help improve the quality of fabricated Ge-based perovskite films [141]. 
 
4.3 Double perovskite 
Most double perovskite solar cells investigated have used Cs2AgBiBr6, while most groups 
reported only ~1% PCE in PV devices based on this material. However, the first report of this 
material in photovoltaics by Greul et al. led to higher PCEs of 2.43% and external quantum 
efficiencies (EQEs) reaching 60% [153]. This was achieved through careful optimization of 
the film quality. Recently, Yang et al. introduced an N179 dye (di-tetrabutylammonium cis-
bis(isothiocyanato) bis(2,2’-bipyridyl-4,4’ dicarboxylato) ruthenium (II)) interlayer between 
the active layer and spiro-OMeTAD HTL, which could improve hole transfer and enhance light 
absorption. As a result, the optimized mesoporous Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cell exhibited a record 
PCE of 2.84% with a VOC of 1.06 V and a JSC of 5.13 mA cm-2 [296]. On the other hand, Gao 
et al. showed that p-i-n Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells could also deliver a PCE of 2.23% with a VOC79
of 1.01 V and a JSC of 3.19 mA cm-2 after  using IPA as the anti-solvent during film synthesis 
[150], which resulted in smooth and uniform films with micron-sized grains. In addition, 
Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells have demonstrated improved stability in ambient air over Sn-, Ge- and 
Pb-based perovskites. The stability of Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells have been tested by storing cells 
in the dark under ambient condition (temperature: 20-30 °C, relative humidity: 40-60% [149]), 
which is actually consistent with the dark storage study in ISOS protocols (ISOS-D-1). 
Eventually, the optimal Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells showed no PCE degradation for at least 30 days. 
 
As mentioned in Section 3.3, the performance of double perovskite devices is still significantly 
limited by their intrinsic optoelectronic properties (large band gaps and poor carrier mobilities) 
and synthesis challenges (low solubility precursors).  
 
4.4 A3B2X9 materials 
MA3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9 are the two A3B2X9 materials that are most commonly investigated in 
reports of defect-ordered perovskite PVs. MA3Bi2I9 devices are generally based on the 
mesoporous structures with spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL. Most PV devices, however, have 
demonstrated very low PCEs, which are believed to be related to the poor film morphology of 
MA3Bi2I9, in addition to the high exciton binding energy and large effective masses. Many 
investigators have worked on improving the film morphology. Zhang et al. fabricated 
MA3Bi2I9 films via a two-step approach with the BiI3 films evaporated under high vacuum and 
transformed into MA3Bi2I9 films under a low vacuum MAI atmosphere [334]. Their MA3Bi2I9 
solar cells consist of the compact, pinhole-free, and large-grained films, demonstrating a PCE 
of 1.64% with a 𝑉𝑜𝑐 of 0.81 V and a JSC of 2.95 mA cm-2. Jain et al. further optimized the 
MA3Bi2I9 film quality via the vapor assisted solution process by exposing solution-processed 
BiI3 films to MAI vapors, and replaced spiro-OMeTAD with poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)80
(P3HT) as the HTL [302]. A PCE of 3.17% with a VOC of 1.01 V and a JSC of 4.02 mA cm-2 
was achieved in their champion solar cells.  
 
Similarly, most Cs3Bi2I9 PV devices were fabricated based on the mesoporous structure as well. 
The PCEs of these devices were also low due to their relatively low photocurrents. Ghosh et 
al. showed that the photocurrents of Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells could be enhanced when the precursor 
solution was prepared with excess BiI3, which may passivate the deep-level defects of Cs3Bi2I9 
[335]. They investigated the influence of different structures (planar and p-i-n), along with the 
mesoporous solar cells with different HTLs, while none of the PCEs of these devices exceeded 
1%. A PCE of 0.21% with a VOC of 0.49 V and a JSC of 0.67 mA cm-2 was achieved in their 
best device. A breakthrough was made by Bai et al. [175]. They reported a dissolution-
recrystallization method to fabricate high-quality Cs3Bi2I9 films. In this method, the mixed 
DMF/CH3OH solvent, which can thoroughly dissolve Cs3Bi2I9 and evaporate, will be dropped 
onto the annealed as-deposited Cs3Bi2I9 films, and the ultrathin Cs3Bi2I9 nanoplates will 
recrystallize after the second annealing. Eventually, the devices with CuI as the HTL achieved 
a record PCE of 3.2% with a significantly improved JSC of 5.78 mA cm-2, which is ascribed to 
the smaller grains and voids within fabricated films. 
  
Sb-based A3B2X9 material solar cells also drew the attention of many researchers due to their 
higher dimensionality (2D) compared to Bi-based counterparts (0D), which could lead to 
improved mobilities. In particular, Cs3Sb2I9 can be 0D or 2D depending on the synthesis 
method (refer to section 3.5). Cs3Sb2I9 solar cells have been fabricated based on n-i-p or p-i-n 
structures. Umar et al. deposited high-quality 2D Cs3Sb2I9 films by using IPA as an antisolvent 
and introducing HCl additive into the precursor solutions, which can decrease the reaction time 
and suppress the formation of Sb-I-Sb clusters [182]. HTL-free planar Cs3Sb2I9 solar cells with81
only TiO2 as the ETL were realized with a PCE of 1.21%, VOC of 0.61 V and a JSC of 3.55 mA 
cm-2. By contrast, 0D Cs3Sb2I9 devices with a similar structure only obtained a PCE of 0.43%. 
Sign et al. fabricated p-i-n 2D Cs3Sb2I9 solar cells with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL and [6,6]-
Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) as the ETL [180], achieving a PCE of 1.49% 
with a VOC of 0.72 V and a JSC of 5.31 mA cm-2. On the other hand, p-i-n 0D Cs3Sb2I9 solar 
cells exhibited a larger VOC (0.77 V) while much smaller JSC (2.96 mA cm-2) and PCE (0.89%), 
which is mainly ascribed to the larger band gaps of 0D Cs3Sb2I9. Alternatively, Peng et al. 
demonstrated mesoporous 0D Cs3Sb2I9 solar cells with poly(N,N’-bis-4-butylphenyl-N,N’- 
isphenyl)benzidine (poly-TPD) as the HTL [171] could only achieve a low PCE of 0.24%. 
However, the incorporation of Cl was found to convert 0D Cs3Sb2I9 into 2D Cs3Sb2ClxI9-x, and 
mesoporous 2D Cs3Sb2ClxI9-x solar cells (with LZ-HTL-1-1 as the HTL) showed a significantly 
improved PCE of 2.15% with a VOC of 0.6 V and a JSC of 6.46 mA cm-2. Additionally, some 
promising results have been obtained with Rb3Sb2I9 solar cells. Weber et al. deposited single 
crystallite Rb3Sb2I9 thin films by using the antisolvent vapor diffusion crystallization method 
[309], where single crystals could grow as the antisolvent was evaporated and condensed onto 
the coated precursor solutions. A PCE of 1.37% and peak EQE of 26% was achieved in their 
champion mesoporous Rb3Sb2I9 with spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL. They also found that the 
incorporation of Br led to a preferred orientation of Rb3Sb2Br9-xIx films parallel to the substrate, 
which would impede carrier transport. Recently, Li et al. employed high temperature annealing 
under SbI3 atmosphere to improve the morphology of Rb3Sb2I9 films and increase the grain 
size [181]. Based on the planar structure with poly(N,N'-bis-4-butylphenyl-N,N'-
bisphenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD) as the HTL, optimized Rb3Sb2I9 solar cells from Li et al.’s 
study demonstrated a comparable PCE (1.35%) but a much higher peak EQE (65.4%), which 
was attributed to the improved mobilities and reduced defects in the devices.82
As discussed in Section 3.5, most PV devices based on A3B2X9 materials are stable in air. For 
instance, the stability of Rb3Sb2I9 solar cells have been tested by storing cells in the dark under 
inert gas atmosphere, which is consistent with the suggested protocol ISOS-D-1I for PSCs 
[327]. As a result, the PCE of Rb3Sb2I9 solar cells could retain 84% of their initial values after 
150 days [309]. However, planar Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells with CuI and spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL 
were found to maintain only 57% and 28% of their initial PCEs, respectively after storing in a 
constant temperature-humid chamber (temperature: 25 °C, relative humidity: 45%) for 38 days 
[175], which implies that the device stability may be influenced by the interactions between 
transport layers and active layers. 
 
The factors limiting the performance of A3B2X9 material-based devices are the wide band gaps, 
high exciton binding energies, poor film morphology, and the presence of deep defects. As 
discussed in section 3.5, wide band gaps and high exciton binding energies can lead to weak 
absorption and poor carrier extraction, respectively. Though some works have attempted to 
tune the band gaps by mixing different halides with A3B2X9 materials at different proportions 
[173], there are not yet sufficiently promising results reported. In addition, high exciton binding 
energies are partly due to the lower dimensionality of A3B2X9 materials, and synthesis routes 
which can convert 0D structure into 2D counterpart for some materials (e.g., Cs3Sb2I9) may 
help to address this issue. Finally, many researchers have managed to resolve the latter two 
issues via various processing techniques. Shin et al. also proposed a general method to fabricate 
compact thin films of most Bi-based A3B2X9 precursors [336], which involves the use of 
solvent complexes to increase the solubility of Bi-based precursors and a subsequently rapid 
nucleation process via an antisolvent dripping. It should be noted that film orientation should 
be taken into account as well when developing synthesis routes since strong anisotropy can be 
seen in A3B2X9 materials.83
 
4.5 ABZ2 materials 
ABZ2-based PV devices can be fabricated as n-i-p or p-i-n structures. Nanocrystals of ABZ2 
could also be mounted onto a mesoporous scaffold, giving a sensitized structure. At present, 
devices based on CuSbS2, CuSbSe2, and AgBiS2 are investigated most. Although some early 
progress has been made in NaBiS2 and NaSbS2 quantum dot sensitized solar cells [196, 200], 
investigations into both materials are still rare. 
 
CuSbS2 PV devices were largely fabricated based on the p-i-n and mesoporous structures. p-i-
n CuSbS2 solar cells typically used Mo as the HTL and ZnO as the ETL with a CdS buffer 
layer between CuSbS2 and ZnO to form a type-II staggered heterojunction and promote carrier 
separation [221]. Septina et al. prepared purified CuSbS2 films with the precursors preheated 
before sulfurization, fabricating p-i-n CuSbS2 solar cells achieving a PEC of 3.1% with a VOC 
of 0.49 V and a JSC of 14.73 mA cm-2 [218]. Banu et al. demonstrated p-i-n CuSbS2 solar cells 
prepared from hybrid inks [219]. The cells they made showed a record PCE of 3.22% with a 
VOC of 0.47 V and a JSC of 15.64 mA cm-2. Mesoporous CuSbS2 solar cells were found to 
exhibit comparable PV performance compared to that of p-i-n solar cells. Chio et al. fabricated 
mesoporous CuSbS2 solar cells with poly(2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-
b;3,4-b’]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)) (PCPDTBT) as the HTL, achieving a 
PCE of 3.1% with a VOC of 0.34 V and a JSC of 21.5 mA cm-2 [337]. 
 
On the other hand, almost all the CuSbSe2 solar cells were built in the p-i-n structure by using 
Mo or Mo/MoOx and ZnO (with CdS buffer layers) as the HTL and ETL, respectively. 
Although there are fewer reports of CuSbSe2 PV devices than CuSbS2 devices, CuSbSe2 PV 
devices have achieved higher performance. Yang et al. optimized the morphology and84
crystalline orientation of hydrazine solution processed CuSbSe2 film by tuning the annealing 
temperature [228]. However, CuSb(Se,S)2 usually occur due to the reaction with competitive 
phases. As a result, the optimal CuSb(Se0.96S0.04)2 solar cells only showed a PCE of 2.7%. 
Welch et al. controlled the evaporation flux ratio of Sb2Se3 and Cu2Se to form pure phase 
CuSbSe2 films, but found a trade-off between JSC and VOC exists in CuSbSe2 solar cells [230]. 
It has been shown that as the Sb2Se3/Cu2Se ratio increased, the JSC would be enhanced due to 
the extended depletion width, while the VOC would be suppressed owing to the reduced hole 
concentration (and hence the reduced quasi Fermi level splitting). Consequently, the highest 
PCE of 4.7% along with a VOC of 0.336 V and a JSC of 26 mA cm-2 were achieved in their 
devices. 
 
In addition to competitive impurity phases and the JSC-VOC trade-off for CuSbSe2 solar cells, 
lower JSC arising is a common challenge for CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2 solar cells. This could be 
attributed to the strong absorption losses of CdS buffer layer [234], which leads to a significant 
drop in the short wavelength range below 520 nm. Moreover, CdS layers are known to have 
some detrimental effects, such the introduction of deep hole defects [338]. Nevertheless, none 
of PV devices with CdS being replaced by other materials have shown promising performance 
to date. 
 
Most AgBiS2 solar cells were fabricated as the planar structure with ZnO as the ETL and PTB7 
(or P3HT)/MoO3 as the HTL. Bernechea et al. displayed AgBiS2 nanocrystal solar cells 
achieving a PCE of 6.3% with a VOC  of 0.45 V and a JSC of 22 mA cm-2 [203]. The cells in this 
work also demonstrated high stability in air with the PCE almost unchanged under ambient 
condition for up to four months. Recently, Burgues-Ceballos et al. have shown that the AgBiS2 
nanocrystal sizes can be enlarged by using the double-step hot-injection technique [314],85
making thin films with higher carrier mobilities and lower defect densities. As a result, their 
champion AgBiS2 nanocrystal solar cell exhibited a PCE of 6.4%, a VOC of 0.46 V along with 
an improved JSC of 22.68 mA cm-2, which can be ascribed to better carrier extraction in this 
device.  
 
Incomplete current collection is one of the main challenges for AgBiS2 solar cells, which could 
be confirmed by the nonlinear dependence of JSC of on light intensity [203]. Improvements in 
the ligands used or the surface passivation of the nanocrystals would be needed to suppress the 
trap recombination during carrier transport. 
 
4.6 Binary halides 
Apart from BiI3, binary halides have not yet been investigated much into PV devices. Most 
BiI3-based PV devices were fabricated based on the planar structure. Hamdeh et al. used TiO2 
and V2O5 as the ETL and HTL [241], respectively, and found that the devices processed in air 
showed better performance than those in a glovebox, which is attributed to the facilitated hole 
transport due to the formation of BiOI layers. Moreover, solvent vapor annealing could also 
improve film quality and boost the PCE of PV devices. A PCE of 1.02% with a VOC of 364 mV 
and a JSC of 7 mA cm-2 were displayed in their work. Tiwari et al. showed that using HTLs 
with higher ionization potential such as poly(9,9-di-noctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) (F8) can exhibit 
better match to the VBM of BiI3, raising the VOC of PV devices [319]. As a result, their 
champion planar BiI3 solar cell demonstrated a slightly improved PCE of 1.21% along with a 
record VOC of 0.607 V. Additionally, hole extraction also plays an important role in determining 
PCEs of BiI3-based PV devices, which could be seen from the substantial influence of the HTL 
on device performance. Searching for HTLs with matched energy levels is thus crucial for BiI3-
based PV devices. Furthermore, the softness of the material makes it challenging to handle86
without scratching the film and causing pinholes to occur [339]. Finally, BiI3 devices have 
exhibited improved stability over Sn-, Ge- and Pb-based perovskites. It has been verified that 
mesoporous BiI3 solar cells stored in ambient air with a relative humidity of 50%, which is also 
consistent with the test requirement of the protocol ISOS-D-1, can retain above 90% of their 
initial PCEs for over 30 days [340]. In addition, these cells could also maintain ~70% of their 
initial PCEs and showed mineral change in their J-V curves after the heat stress (temperature: 
100 ℃ in ambient air, similar to the environment requirement of the protocol ISOS-D-2 with 
a higher temperature) for 2 hours and light-soaking test (by a solar simulator, consistent with 
the environment requirement of the protocol ISOS-L-1) for 20 minutes, respectively [340]. 
 
Recently, planar InI solar cells with CdS and P3HT as the ETL and HTL, respectively, were 
reported by Mitzi’s group [110]. SnI2 was used as an interface modification layer between the 
CdS and InI layer to control the preferred orientation of InI films.  Eventually, a PCE of 0.39% 
with a VOC of 450 mV and a JSC of 2.14 mA cm-2 were demonstrated in the champion cell. 
Although Brandt et al. have showed that InI predominantly forms shallow defects [21], 
Dunlap-Stohl et al. indicated that the weak PL emission from InI-based PV devices suggests 
the presence of non-radiative recombination centers [110]. In addition, significant hysteresis 
was also observed in InI-based PV devices [110]. Improvements in the performance of InI 
devices will require further understanding of the composition and role of defects in this material, 
as well as control over the oxidation of In+ to In3+.  
 
4.7 V-VI-VII materials 
V-VI-VII materials have been applied as photocatalysts (refer to Section 5.2), but have gained 
increasing attention for solar absorber applications more recently. Owing to their original 
application in photocatalysts, early BiOI solar cells were fabricated as liquid-state sensitized87
architectures with iodide redox couple as electrolytes. However, most devices showed very 
low efficiencies. Zhang et al. deposited BiOI flakes onto mesoporous TiO2 as the working 
electrodes, but their devices only reached 0.38% efficiently [341]. Sfaelou et al. replaced 
mesoporous TiO2 with a compact layer of TiO2 and fabricated BiOI solar cells with a PCE over 
1% and a VOC of 0.61 V [256]. Recently, Hoye et al. demonstrated solid-state BiOI solar cells 
with a p-i-n structured comprising of NiOx and ZnO as the HTL and ETL, respectively [254]. 
A record PCE of 1.8% with a VOC of 0.75 V and a JSC of 7 mA cm-2 was achieved in the 
champion device. They showed that the band bending caused by the energy level mismatch 
(Figure 21) between BiOI and the HTL could introduce unwanted energy barriers to hole 
collection.  From this, they claimed that future progress on performance could be made by 
finding HTLs with deeper work functions [254]. Furthermore, BiOI has a layered structure 
with anisotropic carrier transport. The CVD BiOI grown on solution-processed NiOx by Hoye 
et al. had an {012} preferred orientation, which allowed the top and bottom electrodes to be 
connected by the high-mobility planes. This enabled effective charge extraction, with a peak 
EQE up to 80% at 450 nm wavelength [254]. At the same time, the films had an open structure, 
which limited the shunt resistance. It was later shown the preferred orientation of the BiOI 
platelets grown by CVD could be controlled through the temperature of the BiI3 precursor and 
the temperature of the substrate [257], as discussed in Section 3.8. Growing c-axis oriented 
BiOI platelets resulted in compact film morphology, which improved the VOC from 0.7 V (a/b-
axis oriented) to 0.9 V (c-axis oriented).88
 
Figure 21. (a) The measured energy alignment of device stack and (b) schematic energy band 
diagrams for inverted BiOI solar cells. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [238]. Copyright 
2017 Wiley. 
 
Owing to the n-type characteristic of BiSI, Hahn et al. combined BiSI films with p-type CuSCN 
to make single junction solar cells [342]. They tested the PV performance of BiSI/CuSCN solar 
cells immersed in the electrolyte containing iodide compounds and achieved a 0.25% PCE. 
However, the poor charge separation and transport within BiSI films led to an abnormal I-V 
curve in their devices, where dark currents increased slowly under reverse bias. In addition, 
solid-state BiSI/CuSCN solar cells were also fabricated, but a small PCE of only 0.012% was 
reached, which was mainly ascribed to scattering losses from CuSCN layer as well as non-
radiative recombination within the BiSI layer. It is worth mentioning that though they 
attempted to introduce Se-dope BiSI films to reduce the band gaps, this resulted in a reduction 
in the performance, possibly due to increased defect densities. Recently, Tiwari et al. fabricated 
planar BiSI solar cells with SnO2 and F8 serving as the ETL and HTL, respectively [260]. A 
PCE of 1.32% with a VOC of 0.445 V and a JSC of 8.44 mA cm-2 was obtained from their 
optimized device. It was claimed that one key challenge is the presence of other Bi-S-I phases 
in the films [267]. Moreover, BiSI devices also suffer from short carrier lifetime due to the89
presence of deep defects [343] and poor carrier transport, which arises from the strong 
anisotropy of BiSI films [260].  
 
Nie et al. used CBD to fabricate mesoporous SbSI solar cells which demonstrated a PCE up to 
3.05% along with a VOC of 0.58 V and a JSC of 9.11 mA cm-2 [270]. Their great success was 
attributed to the use of  poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta [2,1-b;3,4-
b’]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPBTBT) as the HTL, which can not only 
transport holes effectively but also harvest light not absorbed by SbSI. Mesoporous SbSI solar 
cells in this work retained over 93% of their initial PCEs after 15 days of storage under ambient 
condition in the dark. Similar stability could be maintained even under highly humid condition 
(humidity: 60%). Choi et al. demonstrated planar SbSI solar cells fabricated by a simple 
solution processing method [323], which may help resolve the issues of CBD-synthesized SbSI 
films such as the formation of impurity phases and an uncontrollable Sb/S ratio. However, the 
best planar SbSI solar cell only showed a PCE of 0.93% with a VOC of 0.548 V and a JSC of 
5.45 mA cm-2. Recently, Nie et al. proposed a vapor processing method, where more uniform 
SbSI films could form when CBD-processed Sb2S3 were annealed under vaporized SbI3 
atmosphere [322]. As a result, a record PCE of 3.62% along with a VOC of 0.6 V and a JSC of 
9.62 mA cm-2 was achieved in their mesoporous SbSI solar cells (with PCPDTBT as the HTL). 
Compared to the CBD-processed solar cells, the vapor processed solar cells exhibited better 
crystallinity (stronger XRD peaks), lower series resistance, and better stability (vapor-
processed cells could maintain 91% of  their initial PCEs while CBS-processed cells would 
lose over 70% of theirs after 3 hours under illumination) which is due to the compactness of 
the fabricated films. In this study, they also used halide treatment on Sb2S3 films to passivate 
surface defects and form thin SbSI layers above (Figure 22). It has been claimed that these 
SbSI thin films can exert an external driving force to promote the carrier transport. The90
optimized mesoporous SbSI-interlayered Sb2S3 solar cell demonstrated a high PCE of 6.08% 
with a VOC of 0.62 V and a JSC of 14.92 mA cm-2.  
 
 
Figure 22. Configuration of SbSI-interlayered Sb2S3 solar cell (the HTL is not shown). 
Reprinted with permission from [322]. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 
 
4.8 Overview of perovskite-inspired materials in photovoltaics 
Figure 23 illustrates the highest PCEs and corresponding VOC reported in various PIM-based 
PV devices discussed in this Review. For comparison, the highest values achieved in Pb-based 
perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05) solar cells is also plotted [8]. These are compared to 
the SQ limit for different band gaps, along with the radiative limit in the VOC. It can be seen 
from Figure 23a that except for Sn-based perovskites, all the other PIMs exhibited efficiencies 
below 25% of SQ limit. Furthermore, the VOC of the PIM devices are well below their radiative 
limits (Figure 23b). This is due to a combination of non-radiative recombination (due to traps 
or possibly self-trapped excitons in some cases), high Urbach energies, or shunting due to a 
sub-optimal morphology. There is therefore great room for improvements in PIM-based PV 
devices through the identification of new classes of materials that could tolerate defects and 
engineering the quality of the thin films grown.91
 
Figure 23. (a) The highest efficiencies and (b) the corresponding VOC from various PIM-
based PV devices reported in the literature to date. The highest values reported in Pb-based 
perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.95 (MAPbBr3)0.05) counterpart are also depicted.  
 
5. Broader Applications of Perovskite-Inspired Materials  
There is a strong overlap between the required properties of solar absorbers with the ideal 
properties of materials in wide range of other types of electronics. For example, strong 
absorption of visible light, long transport lengths and low dark currents are also needed in 
radiation detectors, photocatalysts and memristors. This section explores the opportunities in 
applying lead-free PIMs beyond PVs and the new insights into the materials that could be 
gained in doing so.  
 
5.1 Light-emitting applications 
Luminescence is one of the critical properties that influences the performance of materials in 
photovoltaics through the open-circuit voltage [53]. It follows that efficient photovoltaics with 
a direct allowed band gap are promising candidates for light-emission applications. This has 
been particularly well demonstrated in III-V materials [344], and more recently with lead-
halide perovskites [345, 346]. There are two common applications of emitters: 1) phosphors, 
in which the active layer is optically excited and spontaneously emits; and 2) light-emitting92
diodes (LEDs), in which electrons and holes are injected into the active layer, where they 
radiatively recombine to give electroluminescence (EL). For both applications, one of the most 
important properties of the emitter is the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE), 
which quantifies the percentage of recombination events that are radiative (refer to Ref. [346] 
for more details of the other properties influencing the efficiency of LEDs). LHPs have now 
achieved PLQEs approaching 100% across a variety of emission wavelengths [347–349]. 
Green-, red- and near-infrared-emitting perovskite LEDs have now also achieved external 
quantum efficiencies (EQEs) >20% [345, 349, 350]. Critically, pure-halide perovskites have 
demonstrated low Urbach energies <30 meV, and the FWHM of the PL and EL peaks are <30 
nm [53, 351]. This is narrower than achievable in typical organic and inorganic emitters, and 
the high color saturation, coupled with the ability to tune the emission over the entire color 
gamut, makes both perovskite phosphors and LEDs highly suited for ultra-high definition 
displays [352, 353]. But there is a strong motivation to find lead-free alternatives for display 
and lighting applications, owing to regulations limiting the lead content in electrical products 
(e.g., to a maximum of 0.1 wt.% by the European Restriction of Hazardous Substances 
Directive [354]). 
 
Lead-free perovskite-inspired materials, however, have not been close in matching the 
performance and color-purity of LHPs [346, 355–358]. One of the main reasons is the low 
PLQEs of most lead-free materials, many of which have indirect band gaps (refer to Section 
3). But an important exception to the low luminescence in perovskite-inspired materials are 
A3B2X9 nanocrystals. These include Cs3Sb2Br9 nanocrystals (46%– 51.2% PLQE at 410 nm 
wavelength [359, 360]) and Cs3Bi2Br9 nanocrystals (19.4% PLQE at 410 nm wavelength 
[361]). The latter has been used as blue-phosphors, optically-excited with a UV-emitting GaN 
LED. These phosphors were combined with a broad-emitting Y3Al5O2 (YAG) phosphor to93
achieve white-light emission, with Commission Internationale de l’éclairage (CIE) coordinates 
of (0.29, 0.30) (close to the (0.33,0.33) coordinates for pure white) and a cool color temperature 
of 8477 K [361]. An important advantage of Cs3Bi2Br9 is that it forms a passivating shell of 
BiOBr, which improves its stability against moisture and acid. As a result, Cs3Bi2Br9 
nanocrystals could be mixed with tetraethyl orthosilicate and react with HBr and water to form 
a nanocrystal-silica composite. This composite encapsulated the nanocrystals, resulting in 
improved stability under UV lighting (retaining 72% of the PL after 16 continuous UV 
illumination), and under heat stress (retaining 75% of the PL after 16 h continuous heating at 
60 °C [361]). Similar results were achieved with the vacancy-ordered perovskite Cs2SnCl6. 
This perovskite is advantageous over regular tin-based perovskites because the tin cation is 
already in the more stable +4 oxidation state. By doping with bismuth, a PLQE of 78.9% could 
be achieved, with a blue emission wavelength of 455 nm. Cs2SnCl6:Bi was combined with 
yellow phosphors (Ba2Sr2SiO4:Eu2+ and GaAlSiN3:Eu2+) and excited with a UV GaN LED, 
giving white emission with CIE coordinates of (0.36, 0.37) and a color temperature of 4486 K 
[362].  
 
Lead-free double perovskites have also been demonstrated as white-light-emitting phosphors. 
The materials investigated have been Cs2A(I)B(III)Cl6, in which A(I) is Ag+ or Na+ (or a 
mixture of both), and A(III) is In3+ or Bi3+ or a mixture of both. White-light emission from 
these materials stems from broad luminescence below the optical band gap. Cs2AgBiCl6 has a 
wide indirect band gap [142], whereas Cs2NaInCl6 has a direct, parity-forbidden band gap 
[155], across which absorption is forbidden but PL could still occur. Alloying In into 
Cs2AgBiCl6 resulted in a broad orange luminescence peak below the optical band gap of 
Cs2AgBiCl6 appearing. This was attributed to the formation of a lower parity-forbidden band 
gap after alloying with In, from which luminescence occurred with a PLQE up to 36.6% with94
90% In addition [363]. Sub-band gap emission in Cs2NaInCl6 was attributed to self-trapped 
excitons. Undoped Cs2NaInCl6 has no luminescence, which was believed to be due to the self-
trapped excitons being dark. Alloying with Ag+ improved the PLQE to 31.1% [364]. Alloying 
Cs2(Ag0.6Na0.4)InCl6 with 0.04% Bi further increased the PLQE to 86±5%, with broad emission 
centered at 570 nm wavelength [277]. On the other hand, Cs2NaInCl6 alloyed with Bi3+ 
remained dark, with only blue PL due to free excitons. But broad yellow emission was achieved 
through alloying with Mn2+, with a PLQE of 44.6% being achieved, and this was attributed to 
the dark self-trapped exciton transferred to an excited state of Mn2+ [365]. 
Cs2(Ag0.6Na0.4)InCl6:Bi3+ was used as white-light phosphors, owing to its high white-light 
PLQE. With excitation from a GaN LED, emission with CIE coordinates of (0.396,0.448) was 
achieved with a color temperature of 4054 K. Critically, the double perovskite was air stable, 
and even more so when encapsulated with silica. As a result, the emission was stable after 1000 
h of illumination in air [277]. 
 
Currently, there is only a handful of reports of EL from PIMs, and most are on Sn-based 
perovskites. Lai et al. reported near-infrared LEDs from MASnI3, which emitted at 945 nm 
wavelength, but with EQEs only reaching 0.72% [366]. An important limitation was the low 
PLQE of 5.3% [366]. Rand et al. subsequently improved the EQE to 5.0% (at 917 nm EL 
wavelength) by alloying Pb with Sn and introducing a long-chain organoammonium iodide 
ligand to the precursor solution. The inclusion of the ligand resulted in smaller grains with 
passivated surfaces [367]. Ruddlesden-Popper tin-based perovskites have also been 
investigated, but an early investigation into 2D phenethylammonium tin iodide resulted in 
inefficient red-emitting devices (0.15 cd m-2 luminance and 0.03 cd A-1 current efficiency 
[368]). Subsequently, Rogach et al. investigated tin-based Ruddlesden-Popper perovskites 
with bromide as the halide, and oleylammonium as the A-site cation. They were able to directly95
inject into the self-trapped exciton, resulting in broad orange sub-band gap EL (centered at 620 
nm), with 0.1% EQE and 350 cd m-2 luminance [369]. Notably, a PLQE of 88% was achieved 
in colloidal suspensions, and 68% in thin films [369]. Beyond these tin-based perovskites, there 
has recently been a demonstration of Sb-based LEDs. Shan et al. achieved violet EL from 
Cs3Sb2Br9 (408 nm wavelength) with an EQE of 0.2%. The PLQE of the Cs3Sb2Br9 quantum 
dots was 51.2%, and the quantum dots were stable against heat, UV illumination and moisture. 
In particular, the LEDs retained 90% of their initial EL intensity after 6 h of operation at 7 V 
(~70 mA cm-2 current density [359]). This is more stable than their Sn- and Pb-based perovskite 
counterparts. But the FWHMs of all tin- and antimony-based emitters discussed here are 
significantly wider than their lead-based counterparts, typically 50 – 100 nm [359, 366–368]. 
This makes them less competitive for display applications, compared to quantum dot, organic 
and inorganic LEDs already commercially available [352]. 
 
5.2 Photocatalysis  
Leaves absorb sunlight to convert CO2 and water to sugar and oxygen through photosynthesis. 
Similarly, semiconductors can absorb sunlight to enable the production of fuels, precursors for 
value-added products, or the degradation of organic contaminants through photocatalysis [370, 
371]. The production of H2 from water was first achieved by Fujishima et al. in 1969, in which 
TiO2 was used to absorb UV light. Holes generated in TiO2 oxidized water to O2 gas, while the 
electrodes transferred to the Pt counter electrode reduced H+ to H2 [372, 373]. This spurred 
several decades of research into semiconductor-based photocatalysis, and was motivated both 
by the promise of the clean solar-to-chemical energy conversion, as well as the limitations of 
TiO2 in only being able to absorb a small part of the solar spectrum due to its wide band gap 
[370, 371, 374]. The materials and devices structures for photocatalysis, as well as the 
operating principles, are reviewed in Ref. [370, 371, 374, 375]. The requirements for the96
semiconductor are: 1) good light absorption, 2) high chemical stability in the presence of the 
electrolyte, 3) suitable band-edge positions for enabling the redox reactions required, 4) 
efficient charge transport, and 5) to be low-cost. Requirements 1, 4 and 5 overlap with the 
requirements for photovoltaic materials. Lead-halide perovskites have therefore been 
considered for photocatalysis, owing to their high absorption coefficients, strong overlap in 
their absorption with the solar spectrum, and long diffusion lengths, coupled with the ability to 
achieve high-quality films when processed at low temperature. But lead-halide perovskites are 
limited by their low chemical stability [371]. This necessitates tailoring of the solution to 
minimize degradation to the perovskite (e.g., using a saturated halo acid solution for water 
splitting), or encapsulating the perovskite to isolate them from the polar solvent [371, 376–
379]. But ensuring the long-term stability of the photocathode or photoanode, as well as 
avoiding potential lead contamination of the solution motivate the investigation of lead-free 
and more stable alternatives.  
 
In photocatalytic applications, the wider band gap of most perovskite-inspired materials is 
advantageous. Murphy et al. found that the optimal band gap for solar-driven water splitting is 
2.03 eV, which would enable a theoretical maximum solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency 
of 16.8% [380]. This is because the quasi-Fermi levels of the semiconductor determine the 
oxidation/reduction potential of the photoelectrochemical cell. Therefore, in the case of water 
splitting, the band gap needs to at least be equal to the difference in redox potentials for H+/H2 
(hydrogen reduction) and O2/H2O (water oxidation). This has a value of 1.23 eV, but the 
semiconductor band gap needs to be larger in order to account for thermodynamic losses (0.3-
0.4 eV) and overpotentials for fast reactions (0.4-0.6 eV). A band gap of  >1.9 eV therefore 
should be used [374], indicating that many of the double perovskites, A3B2X9 compounds and 
V-VI-VII compounds are suitable, particularly given their improved environmental stability97
compared to lead-halide perovskites (refer to Section 3). The electronic band positions of these 
perovskite-inspired materials compared to the redox potentials for water splitting, as well as 
for CO2 reduction [371] are shown in Figure 24. It is noted that the redox potentials and band 
positions are given on a relative hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale. H+/H2 under standard 
conditions is typically taken as a reference point (standard hydrogen electrode), which occurs 
at pH 0 and has a value of 4.44±0.02 eV relative to vacuum level according to IUPAC [374]. 
But according to the Nernst equation, the redox potential for H+/H2, as well as O2/H2O, CO2/CO 
and CO2/CH4 all vary with -0.059pH [V] [371]. The potential across the Helmholtz double 
layer on the semiconductor surface also changes with -0.059 pH [V]. The RHE scale is 
therefore used, in which all potentials are given relative to H+/H2 at a given pH [374]. 
 
 
Figure 24. Band-edge positions of perovskite-inspired materials, which are compared to 
methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and traditional photocatalytic materials. The band 
positions are shown on a relative hydrogen electrode (RHE) potential scale (energy scale 
shown as a comparison). The RHE redox potentials of common half-reactions are given [371, 
374]. The band positions are obtained from Ref. [151, 154, 384, 385, 254, 255, 359, 371, 374, 
381–383].98
Many recent works on lead-free perovskite-inspired materials for photocatalytic applications 
have focused on double perovskites, vacancy-ordered perovskites and A3B2X9 materials. These 
materials have been demonstrated to be more phase-stable than methylammonium lead iodide 
in ambient air [147, 151, 176, 383]. Groups have also demonstrated Cs2AgBiBr6 to remain the 
same phase after illumination with 70 mW cm-2 white light for 500 h [147], while Rb3Bi2I9, 
Cs3Bi2I9 and (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 was found to maintain the same phase after 12 h of illumination 
with a UV lamp (80.4 μW cm-2 [384]). Despite these promising stability results, efforts have 
focused on the application of these perovskite-inspired materials as photocatalysts under 
benign environments (e.g., halo acid solutions or gaseous precursors), rather than in 
photoelectrolytic devices in more aggressive aqueous environments. Nevertheless, these works 
have found the photocatalysts to be stable under operation. Many works have focused on CO2 
reduction to form CO or CH4 (or a mixture of both), and most materials have suitable electron 
affinities to induce the reduction of CO2 (Figure 24). Zhou et al. synthesized Cs2AgBiBr6 
double perovskite nanocrystals through hot-injection [147]. However, the yield of CO and CH4 
were 5.5 mol g-1 and 0.65 mol g-1 respectively. This was improved by washing the 
nanocrystals in ethanol to remove the oleic acid and oleylamine ligands prior to the application 
of the nanocrystals as photocatalysts, which resulted in the yields improving to 14.1 μmol g-1 
and 9.6 mol g-1 for CO and CH4 respectively. However, the external quantum efficiency was 
only 0.028% at 398 nm wavelength. Nevertheless, the washed double perovskite nanocrystals 
were found to not change in phase or surface composition or agglomerate after 6 h operation, 
implying that the nanocrystals were stable in the ethyl acetate solution the CO2 was dissolved 
in [147]. Wang et al. obtained comparable product yields using SnS2 nanosheets decorated 
with Cs2SnI6. This was achieved by reacting the SnS2 nanosheets with CsI dissolved in ethanol. 
The improvement in photocatalytic activity by forming Cs2SnI6 was attributed to the smaller 
band gap of the vacancy-ordered perovskite (1.3 eV [383]), which led to an increased99
population of photogenerated carriers [381]. Higher product yields were obtained by Bhosale 
et al. using A3B2I9 photocatalysts, especially Cs3Bi2I9, which was found to have high 
photocatalytic activity and gave yields of 78 mol g-1 and 15 mol g-1 for CO and CH4 
respectively after 10 h [384]. The Cs3Bi2I9 was synthesized as nanocrystals with oleic acid and 
oleylamine ligands and dispersed in trichloromethane after purification. The trichloromethane 
had a mixture of CO2 gas and H2O vapor introduced to it, and the nanocrystals were illuminated 
with a UV lamp [384]. Yet higher product yield was achieved using Cs3Sb2Br9 nanocrystals, 
which reached 516 [385] mol g-1 for CO after 5 h, with illumination under 1 sun radiation. 
By contrast, CsPbBr3 nanocrystals produced only 53.8 mol g-1 CO after 5 h under the same 
conditions. The Cs3Sb2Br9 nanocrystals were synthesized by hot-injection, and were exposed 
to CO2 gas dissolved in octadecene. The same nanocrystals were used three times, and it was 
found that with each subsequent usage, there was a decrease in the product yield. But after the 
third usage, the yield was approximately 30% of that of the first usage. Despite this reduction 
in activity, the yield remained higher than the yield of fresh CsPbBr3 nanocrystals [385].   
 
Cs2AgBiBr6 and (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 have also been investigated for the photocatalytic reduction 
of H+ to H2 [386, 387]. H2 is an important clean fuel that combusts to only produce H2O, is 
used for hydrogen fuel cells, and is a convenient option for storing excess solar energy to 
compensate for the intermittent nature of terrestrial solar radiation [370, 388]. Wang et al. 
synthesized Cs2AgBiBr6 powder, and a mixture of HBr and H3PO2 was used as the H+ source. 
The Cs2AgBiBr6 photocatalyst was illuminated with white light (300 W), and H2 was generated 
with a rate of 0.6 mol g-1 h-1, averaged over 10 h. The photocatalytic activity was improved 
by 80 times to 48.9 μmol g-1 h-1 by adding reduced graphene oxide (rGO) to the double 
perovskite. Moreover, it was found that the photocatalytic activity of the composite remained 
stable after 12 cycles (120 h total). It is believed that the improved catalytic activity was due100
to 1) photogenerated electrons from the double perovskite being injected to the rGO, which 
contains active sites for H+ reduction, and 2) a reduction in the recombination rate because of 
the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes at the perovskite/rGO junction [386]. 
A higher H2 production rate of 169.2 μmol g-1 h-1 was reported by Guo et al., who used 
(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 powder coated with Pt. The electrolyte was HI solution, and it was found that 
(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 remained phase-stable in this solution. While the energy of the photogenerated 
holes was insufficient to oxidize water, they were believed to oxidize I- to I3-. H3PO2 was added 
to the solution to reduce I3- to prevent I3- from accumulating and blocking light absorption in 
the (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9/Pt photocatalyst. The stability was tested through 7 repeat cycles (each 
10 h long), with only a small decrease in the catalytic activity [387]. Finally, Cs2AgBiBr6 
powders have also been used as a photocatalyst for the degradation of ionic dyes in ethanol 
solution by forming oxygen radicals from O2. The catalytic activity was again enhanced by 
coating with Pt. The double perovskite/Pt composites were observed to maintain their 
photocatalytic activity and phase after five cycles, which each had a duration of 1 h [389]. 
 
V-VI-VII materials have been investigated as both photocatalysts and photoelectrodes before 
the work on lead-halide perovskite photocatalysts began. These V-VI-VII materials are 
appealing due to their strong absorption of visible light. Two examples are BiOI and BiSI, 
which have band gaps of 1.6–1.9 eV [254, 390] (Figure 25), and have been investigated as 
photocatalysts for degrading organic contaminants in water, such as methyl orange and crystal 
violet [390, 391]. BiOI itself has been found to have low photocatalytic activity due to its short 
charge-carrier lifetimes [391]. The photocatalytic activity has been improved through 
heterostructures, such as BiOI/MoS2, BiOI/WO3, BiOI/AgI, BiOI/Ag, BiOI/Ag/AgI, 
BiOI/Bi2WO6, BiOI/Ag3PO4, BiOI/Bi2MoO6, BiOI/ZnSn(OH)6, BiOI/BiOBr [391]. Similarly, 
the photocatalytic activity of BiSI was improved by forming a composite with MoS2 [390].101
MoS2 forms a type II heterojunction with both BiOI and BiSI, and this is thought to improve 
the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, which can then take part in the 
photodegradation of the organic contaminants [391]. High photocatalytic activity was achieved 
from SbSI without needing to form a heterostructure. Tamilselvan et al. demonstrated that 
micron-sized urchin-shaped SbSI degraded 97% of methyl orange [392], which is comparable 
to BiOI/MoS2 nanocomposites and higher than BiOI alone [391]. Investigations found that 
SbSI induced the degradation of methyl orange by forming oxygen radicals through the 
oxidation of singlet oxygen with photogenerated holes [392]. Wang et al. achieved a slightly 
higher degradation rate of methyl orange in aqueous solution (99% within 1 min when 
illuminated with a 300 W xenon lamp) through the use of SbSI nanocrystals at room 
temperature or at 65 °C [393]. However, they attributed the degradation of methyl orange to 
the formation of singlet oxygen rather than oxygen radicals [393]. For all materials 
(BiOI/MoS2, BiSI/MoS2, SbSI), it was found that the photocatalysts maintained their activity 
after several cycles [391].   
 
Defects in bismuth oxyhalides have been found to enhance photocatalytic activity. For 
example, it was found that oxygen vacancies in BiOBr and BiOCl led to an increase in the 
product yield for the reduction of CO2 to CO or CH4 [394, 395]. It is believed that these oxygen 
vacancies act as sites for CO2 adsorption, where they are activated to radical ions that can be 
reduced with photogenerated electrons. It is also proposed that the oxygen vacancies can trap 
electrons to prolong their separation from photogenerated holes [394]. These oxygen vacancies 
were induced in BiOBr by modifying the solvothermal synthesis, in which ethylene glycol was 
used as the solvent instead of water (which gave stoichiometric BiOBr [394]). For BiOCl, 
Zhang et al. induced oxygen vacancies by illuminating for 5 h with a Xe lamp. But despite the 
improvements in photocatalytic activity, the product yield of CH4 in BiOBr and BiOCl102
remained lower than Cs3Bi2I9 [384, 394, 395]. Nevertheless, the materials were found to 
maintain their activity after several cycles, and, in the case of BiOCl, it was found that the 
oxygen vacancies could be regenerated through illumination [394, 395].  
 
Bismuth oxyhalides have also been investigated in photoelectrochemical cells. BiOI was used 
in photoelectrochemical cells with an I3-/I- redox couple (0.53 V reduction potential relative to 
the standard hydrogen electrode) in an acetonitrile-based solution. Platelets of BiOI were 
grown by successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) and spray pyrolysis [256, 
396]. Such cells can be used as photovoltaic devices, but the performance was low, with PCEs 
of 1% or below, and EQEs reaching only 60% [256, 396]. Possibly a limiting factor was a non-
compact structure of the BiOI platelets, or a non-optimal arrangement. Subsequent work on 
growing BiOI by chemical vapor deposition resulted in more compact films, with PCEs 
reaching 1.8% and EQEs reaching 80% (refer to Section 4.7) [254]. Beyond photovoltaics, 
bismuth oxyhalides could be used for photo-assisted water conversion. Bhachu et al. 
synthesized thin films of BiOI, BiOBr and BiOCl by aerosol-assisted chemical vapor 
deposition (AA-CVD) and performed photoelectrochemical testing in a 0.5 mol L-1 Na2SO4 
electrolyte (pH of 6.5), with a Pt counter electrode and Ag/AgCl reference electrode [255], and 
with 1 sun illumination. BiOI was found to not give any photocurrent at 0 V(RHE), suggesting 
that it would not reduce H+. However, the photocurrent was ~0.1 mA cm-2 at 1.23 V(RHE), 
suggesting that the BiOI photoelectrochemical cells could oxidize water. BiOBr was also found 
to be capable of oxidizing water, with a photocurrent of ~0.3 mA cm-2 at 1.23 V(RHE). BiOCl 
showed very little photocatalytic activity. But all three materials were found to be unstable in 
the electrolyte. For example, the photocurrent from BiOBr at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.6 V(RHE)) 
was found to decrease by 23% after 1 h, whereas BiOI at the same potential decreased after 
only 100 s [255]. Moreover, the photocurrents were significantly lower than those achieved 
with Cu2O, which has a similar band gap. But recent Cu2O photoelectrodes have used a103
heterojunction structure, as a well as a surface catalyst to improve the photocatalytic activity 
[388]. Similar strategies could be investigated for V-VI-VII materials. 
 
5.3 Radiation detection 
 
The detection of ionizing radiation (particularly X-rays and γ-rays) is important for a wide 
range of applications, including security screening, medical diagnostics and the 
characterization of materials [186, 397–399]. Furthermore, it is important to be able to detect 
and quantify heavy charged particles, such as α-particles, which are by-products from nuclear 
reactions [400]. The key properties of radiation detector materials are that they need to have a 
large: 1) average atomic number (Zavg), 2) product of mobility and charge-carrier lifetime (μτ), 
and 3) resistivity (>109 Ω cm [397, 398, 401]). A high atomic number is needed because the 
attenuation coefficient (α) of high energy photons is proportional to Z4/E3, where E is the 
photon energy [246, 402, 403]. A large μτ product is needed for the efficient extraction of 
charge-carriers because the thickness required to completely absorb radiation is often at the 
millimeter scale [402] or larger. The dependence of the photocurrent (I) from a radiation 
detector to the μτ product is given by the Hecht equation: 
𝐼=
𝐼0𝜇𝜏𝑉
𝐿2
1−𝑒−𝐿2
𝜇𝜏𝑉
⁄
1+𝐿
𝑉
𝑠
𝜇
                                                                                                        (6) [398] 
In Equation 6, I0 is the saturated photocurrent, V the applied bias, L the thickness of the 
radiation detector, and s the surface recombination velocity. Typically μτ >10-4-10-3 cm2 V-1 
[404] is needed. If the μτ product is low, a large applied field is needed to extract the carriers, 
but this can increase the dark current, which reduces the signal-to-noise ratio. A high resistivity 
is also needed to maintain a low dark current to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio (which 
gives high image contrast), as well as the ability to detect lower doses of radiation (i.e., reduced 
lowest detectable dose rate). This is especially important for medical diagnostic applications104
and security screening, in which a lower dose of harmful radiation can be used, reducing the 
risk of causing cancer in the human subject. The lowest detectable dose rate required for 
medical applications is 50 mGyair s-1 [399], but there is motivation to be able to detect lower 
doses down to 0.1 nGyair s-1, which is the background radiation levels in the US [403], and also 
because using lower doses improves the spatial resolution of the detector [403]. Note that the 
unit Gy (gray) represents the energy of ionizing radiation absorbed by a particular mass (1 Gy 
= 1 J kg-1). The dark current can be reduced by increasing the band gap, and at room 
temperature, the band gap should be between 1.4 and 2.5 eV [399, 401, 405]. The upper limit 
to the band gap is so that the electron-hole ionization energy is small [401]. Another important 
parameter in radiation detectors is the sensitivity (S), which is defined as S = (ION – IOFF)/(dose 
rate [187]). The sensitivity would therefore depend on Z, μτ product, as well as the dark 
current. The spatial resolution, response speed (which determines the duration of exposure to 
harmful radiation that is needed), energy resolution, linear dynamic range, uniformity and 
stability of the detectors are also important parameters [398, 403]. 
 
Often the materials used for radiation detectors are single crystals. This is because the 
penetration depth of radiation (from soft X-rays to hard γ-rays) are on the millimeter to 
centimeter scale. It is also because single crystals tend to have a lower defect density and larger 
μτ products than thin films. A common radiation detector is silicon. But silicon has a low Z 
value and low band gap. Thus, despite its high μτ product, it has low stopping power, low 
resistivity, low sensitivity and a high lowest detectable dose rate (Table 3). Silicon therefore 
tends to only be used for soft X-ray (E <10 keV) detection and in portable detectors (e.g., for 
EDX or XRF [398]). Amorphous selenium (a-Se) has a higher Z value and therefore stronger 
stopping power for radiation. a-Se is the most common solid-state material for the direct 
detection of X-rays, but has a low μτ product. High applied biases are therefore needed, which105
leads to low sensitivities (Table 3 [398]). Other alternatives contain toxic elements (CdxZn1-
xTe and HgI2 [398]), or require liquid nitrogen cooling (such as high purity Ge [405], which 
has a small band gap of 0.66 eV and needs cooling to reduce the dark current [398]). Beyond 
direct-conversion materials, radiation detection can also occur by the use of scintillators to 
absorb and down-convert the radiation to lower-energy photons that can be detected using 
standard silicon-based photodiodes [402]. But common scintillators are alkali halides doped 
with toxic Tl [398, 402], and have given lower resolution for imaging and lower linearity in 
their response to the radiation dose [405] than direct detectors. Recently, lead-halide 
perovskites have gained attention for radiation detectors, owing to their composition of high 
atomic number elements, the high μτ products achievable, their widely tunable band gaps, and 
their facile processability from solution [397, 399, 400, 402]. As a result, perovskite X-ray 
detectors can operate at room temperature with improved performance (in terms of sensitivity 
and lowest detectable dose rate) over a-Se and CdxZn1-xTe have been demonstrated (Table 3). 
Furthermore, lead-halide perovskites have demonstrated promising radiation hardness to 
protons and γ-rays [398]. Lead-halide perovskites, with high PLQEs to visible light excitation, 
have also demonstrated reasonable X-ray excited luminescence yields at room temperature, 
making them suitable for consideration as scintillators [406]. The price of each perovskite 
single crystal is estimated to be US$0.5–1.0 cm-3 based on the price of the precursors [397]. 
By contrast CdxZn1-xTe single crystals cost $3000 cm-3, in part due to the low demand for these 
materials for radiation detectors [398]. Despite these advantages, lead-halide perovskites have 
limited stability in air [176], and can degrade under continuous irradiation with high flux-
density X-rays in air [20] for extended periods of time. In addition, the lead content of 
perovskite single crystals significantly exceeds the limited imposed by regulations on 
hazardous elements [403]. Ion migration in lead-halide perovskites could also result in drift in106
the dark current, which could increase the lowest detectable dose rate [186]. It is therefore 
important to consider perovskite-inspired materials for radiation detection. 
 
Perovskite-inspired materials have many desirable properties for radiation detectors: the band 
gaps of most materials are within the ideal 1.4-2.5 eV range, and they are comprised of high 
atomic number elements (e.g., Bi and I). In particular, many of these materials are stable in air, 
have low toxicity and can be processed as single crystals using facile fabrication methods. Prior 
to the work on lead-halide perovskites, BiI3 had already been investigated for radiation 
detectors [407–410]. BiI3 has a band gap of 1.67±0.09 eV [411], and can be grown as single 
crystals by the vertical Bridgman method and physical vapor transport [246, 409] (refer to 
Section 3.7 for details). Owing to the high Zavg of 60.5 and density (5.78 g cm-3), the mass 
absorption coefficient is large (6.746 cm2 g-1 at 60 keV). In addition, BiI3 has a low ionization 
energy (5.8 eV) that is comparable to CdxZn1-xTe (5 eV) and lower than a-Se (45 eV). BiI3 can 
therefore easily convert absorbed X-rays into charges through the photoelectric effect [409]. 
For device characterization, BiI3 is used in a photoconductor structure owing to its high 
resistivity (109-1011 Ω cm), in which its dark current is several orders of magnitude smaller 
than its photocurrent. That is, BiI3 has two ohmic contacts, usually Au or Pd [407, 409]. These 
can be applied on the front and back surface of the single crystal (planar) or both on the front 
surface (coplanar). Sun et al. found that the planar structure resulted in 1.8-2.5 times higher 
sensitivities of ~1.3  104 μC Gy-1air cm-2, which are comparable to MAPbBr3 and larger than 
CdxZn1-xTe or a-Se [409] (Table 3). This was attributed to a more uniform electric field in the 
planar configuration [409]. Dmitriev et al. used the planar configuration to measure an electron 
mobility-lifetime product of 10-5 cm2 V-1 [407] through photoconductivity measurements.107
By contrast, Cs2AgBiBr6, MA3Bi2I9 and (NH4)3Bi2I9 single crystals are grown from solution 
[186, 187, 403]. Au electrodes were used for Cs2AgBiBr6 and MA3Bi2I9 radiation detectors 
[186, 403], whereas Ag was painted the (NH4)3Bi2I9 single crystal [187]. The ionization 
energies for these materials are low: 5.61 eV for Cs2AgBiBr6 [403] and 5.47 eV for (NH4)3Bi2I9 
[187]. As-grown Cs2AgBiBr6 was reported to have a trap density of 4.54  109 cm-3 and 
mobility of 3.17 cm2 V-1 s-1, as determined from space-charge limited current measurements. 
By post-annealing the single crystals at 100 °C for 2 h in N2, the trap density was reduced to 
1.74  109 cm-3, whereas the mobility increased to 11.81 cm2 V-1 s-1. This resulted in the μτ 
product increasing from 3.75  10-3 cm2 V-1 to 6.3  10-3 cm2 V-1, which is larger than a-Se and 
BiI3 (Table 3). The surface recombination velocity was reduced by washing the single crystals 
in isopropanol to remove surface defect states, resulting in the resistivity increasing to 
1011 Ω cm. Despite these promising properties, and despite Cs2AgBiBr6 having a higher Zavg 
than MAPbBr3, the sensitivity achieved was only 8 μC Gy-1air cm-2, which increased to 
105 μ C Gy-1air cm-2 after applying an electric field of 25 V mm-1. However, the larger 
resistivity led to a low dark current (~0.15 nA cm-2 at 5 V) and therefore a small lowest 
detectable dose rate of 0.0597  C Gyair s-1 [403]. A smaller lowest detectable dose rate and 
significantly larger sensitivity were achieved with MA3Bi2I9 single crystals, which have a 0D 
crystal structure (Table 3 [186]). This may be due to the wide band gap and high resistivity 
(1011 Ω cm in the out-of-plane direction) resulting in a low dark current of only 0.98 nA cm-2 
at 120 V bias [186]. Notably the activation energy barrier for ion migration was found to be 
0.31-0.46 eV [186], comparable to Cs2AgBiBr6 (0.35 eV) and larger than MAPbBr3 (0.19 eV 
[187]). A higher activation energy barrier was found for (NH4)3Bi2I9. (NH4)3Bi2I9 is a layered 
material, and the activation energy barrier was found to be higher in the [001] direction (i.e., 
between planes; 0.91 eV cf. 0.72 eV along the [100] direction [187]). Owing to the layered 
structure, (NH4)3Bi2I9 exhibited anisotropic transport properties, in which higher μτ products108
and sensitivities were obtained in the [100] direction (1.1  10-2 cm2 V-1; 0.8  104 μC Gy-
1air cm-2) than the [001] direction (4.0  10-3 cm2 V-1; 803 C Gy-1air cm-2). However, the signal 
to noise ratio in the [001] direction was found to be larger, leading to a smaller lowest 
detectable dose rate of 0.055 μGyair s-1 (cf. 0.210 μGyair s-1 in the [100] direction), which was 
attributed to reduced ion migration [187]. All three materials were found to be stable in ambient 
air and withstand temperatures >200 °C [186, 187, 403]. 
 
Table 3. Materials properties of direct X-ray detectors and their performance 
Material 
Zavg 
μτ (cm2 V-1) 
Resistivity 
((Ω cm) 
Sensitivity 
(μC Gy-1air cm-2) 
Lowest 
detectable dose 
rate (μGyair s-1) 
Ref 
Si 
14 
>1 
104 
8 
<8300 
[412–415] 
a-Se 
34 
10-7 
 
20 
5.5 
[416, 417] 
CdxZn1-xTe 
48.2-49.1 
0.01 
1010  
318 
50 
[418] 
MAPbBr3a 
45.1 
0.012 
~107 
2.1 × 104 
0.039 
[419] 
BiI3 
60.5 
10-5  
109–1011 
104 
- 
 
[407, 409] 
Cs2AgBiBr6 
53.1 
6.3 × 10-3 
109–1011  
105 
0.0597 
[403] 
MA3Bi2I9  
- 
~10-3 
1010–1011 
1.1 × 104 
0.0006 
[186] 
(NH4)3Bi2I9 
- 
1.1 × 10-2 
106 – 108  
0.8 × 104 
0.210 
[187] 
a MA is CH3NH3+  
Beyond the direct conversion of X-rays to electrical energy, perovskites have also been 
investigated as scintillators. A recent work found CsPbBr3 nanocrystals to demonstrate 
significantly higher sensitivity than Bi4Ge3O12 (one of the standard scintillator materials), and 
have a sensitivity to X-rays on the same order of magnitude as CsI:Tl [420]. Recently, 
(C8H17NH3)2SnBr4 was demonstrated as a lead-free perovskite scintillator. These had a PLQE 
of 98%. It was suggested that the mechanism for X-ray induced emission (radioluminescence) 
was photoelectric ionization, followed by relaxation to the band-edge to form excitons that 
recombine radiatively. The radioluminescence spectrum was found to be almost the same as 
the PL spectrum. The emission peak was centered at 596 nm, which is detectable by standard 
CCDs. The tin-based perovskite was made into a composite with PMMA. The 
radioluminescence was found to be linear with the X-ray dose down to 104 μGy s-1, which is a109
sufficiently low dose to be safely used in X-ray imaging. The spatial resolution achieved with 
the perovskite scintillator/CCD system was 200 μm, which was lower than reported for lead-
based perovskite systems. The tin-based perovskite/PMMA composite also demonstrated no 
decrease in radioluminescence intensity after cycled X-ray exposure over 800 s [421]. 
 
Table 4. Properties of direct γ-ray and α-particle detectors  
Material 
Zavg 
μτ (cm2 V-1)a 
Resistivity (Ω cm) 
Energy 
resolution (%) 
Ref 
Gamma ray detector 
HPGe 
32 
>1 
102–103 
0.2 
[422, 423] 
CdxZn1-xTe 
48.2-49.1 
0.004–0.01  
1010 
0.5 
[424, 425] 
CsPbBr3 
65.9 
1.34 × 10-3 
1011 
3.8–3.9  
[426] 
Sb:BiI3 
60.5 
10-4 
108–1010  
2.2 
[404] 
Alpha particle detector 
CdxZn1-xTe 
48.2-49.1 
10-3–10-2  
1010 
~1% 
[422, 427, 428] 
CsPbBr3 
65.9 
9.5 × 10-4 
109 
15% 
[400] 
BiI3 
60.5 
-  
1010  
40.2% 
[404, 408, 410] 
Sb:BiI3 
60.5 
- 
109 
33 – 66% 
[246] 
Cs3Bi2I9 
57.7 
5.4 × 10-5 
9.4 × 1012 
- 
[405] 
Cs3Sb2I9 
53.1 
1.1 × 10-5 
5.2 × 1011 
- 
[405] 
Rb3Bi2I9 
53.9 
1.7 × 10-6 
3.2 × 1011 
- 
[405] 
Rb3Sb2I9 
49.3 
4.5 × 10-6 
8.5 × 1010 
- 
[405] 
a the highest μτ product is shown for anisotropic materials  
  
 
In γ-ray detection, the energy resolution of the detector is an important parameter. This is 
because the detector needs to accurately identify the characteristic spectrum of specific 
radionucleotides. Although high energy resolution can be achieved with high purity Ge and 
CdxZn1-xTe (Table 4), these materials are limited by their need to operate at cryogenic 
temperatures or high cost, respectively, as discussed above. Recently, He et al. achieved high 
sensitivity γ-ray detectors using CsPbBr3 single crystals, which demonstrated an energy 
resolution of 3.8-3.9% (FWHM relative to the energy of the peak) for the γ-ray peak [426]. In 
perovskite-inspired materials, there has been extensive work on BiI3 for γ-ray detection. The 
total attenuation length for photoelectric absorption (the main process by which γ-rays are 
converted to electron-hole pairs) in BiI3 is smaller than CdxZn1-xTe (Figure 25b) due to the110
higher Zavg for BiI3 [405] (Table 4). But despite the high Zavg and reasonable μτ products 
demonstrated in X-ray detectors, BiI3 capable of detecting moderate energy γ-rays (>100 keV) 
have only been recently demonstrated. The limited performance has been attributed to the 
formation of voids and defects in BiI3 during growth by the vertical Bridgeman method [404]. 
The density of iodine vacancies was found to be reduced through Sb doping, which led to 
improved resistivities (from 1.45  108 Ω cm for BiI3 to 2.63  109 Ω cm for Sb:BiI3) and a 
four-order-of-magnitude reduction in the leakage current in BiI3 single crystals [246]. The 
higher-quality Sb:BiI3 crystals demonstrated an energy resolution of 2.2% for 137Cs (662 keV) 
radiation [404], substantially lower than reported for CsPbBr3 [426].  
 
 
Figure 25. Attenuation length of perovskite-inspired materials compared to CdxZn1-xTe (CZT) 
under (a) total attenuation and (b) photoelectric absorption. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [405]. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.    
 
Beyond X-rays and γ-rays, the detection of α-particles is important because these are the 
byproducts of nuclear reactions and nuclear decays [400]. μτ particles are also used in the 
measurement of composition, such as in Rutherford backscattering spectrometry. The energy 
resolution of the α-particle detector is therefore an important factor. In testing α-particle 
detectors, 5.5 MeV α −particles from an 241Am source are commonly used [246, 400, 405, 410,111
428]. Current work on perovskite and perovskite-inspired materials for α-particle detectors 
have not demonstrated energy resolutions or μτ products matching industry-standard CdxZn1-
xTe (Table 4). In fact, the defect perovskites (A3B2I9 materials) are not able to resolve the α-
particle peak, and have low μτ products. This was attributed to the low mobilities, which limit 
the charge collection efficiency [405]. By contrast, Sb:BiI3 single crystals were found to have 
electron mobilities of 1000±200 cm2 V-1 s-1, which are similar to the mobilities of CdxZn1-xTe 
[246]. Sb:BiI3 demonstrated an energy resolution of 66% to α-particles, which improved to 
33% after applying an electric field of 532 V cm-1 for 8 h, and the improvement in resolution 
was attributed to reduced leakage currents [246]. CsPbBr3 single crystals were also found to 
be capable of resolving the α-particle peak, demonstrating an energy resolution of 15%. An 
important factor was the high mobilities of 63 cm2 V-1 s-1 for electrons and 49 cm2 V-1 s-1 for 
holes, leading to reasonable μτ products reaching up to 10-3 cm2 V-1 [400]. Future efforts to 
improve the performance of defect perovskites for α -particle detection should focus on 
improving the mobility [405]. While the mobilities could be limited due to strong-electron 
phonon coupling, defect perovskite X-ray detectors have achieved μτ products reaching 10-
2 cm2 V-1 s-1 (Table 3), and improved performance may be expected from these materials for 
α-particle detection. 
 
5.4 Electronic devices 
Two critical electronic devices are thin film transistors (TFTs) and memristors. The operating 
principles of these devices can be found in review articles, such as Ref. [402, 429]. TFTs are 
ubiquitously used in electronic circuits, in which they are used as switches, for amplification, 
as well as for the fabrication of logic devices (particularly the Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor or CMOS). Memristors are actively explored for next-generation terabyte-scale 
non-volatile memory storage that can be operated with low power. Historically, the materials112
considered for these applications have been silicon or oxides [402, 429]. But more recently, 
lead-halide perovskites have been actively explored for these applications with promising 
results [402, 429]. As with all other electronic applications, it will be important to reduce the 
lead content used in these devices, as well as improve the stability under operation. 
 
In TFTs, tin-based perovskites have been widely explored as a lead-free alternative. In fact, the 
first organic-inorganic perovskite TFT was a 2D tin-based perovskite ((C6H5C2H4NH3)2SnI4 
or (PEA)2SnI4), reported by Mitzi et al. well before lead-halide perovskites were actively 
considered for photovoltaics. This TFT demonstrated p-channel character with a field-effect 
mobility of 0.6 cm2 V-1 s-1 [430]. Significantly higher electron mobilities have recently been 
reported in lead-based perovskites, with field-effect mobilities exceeding 10 cm2 V-1 s-1 
demonstrated at room temperature [431], which is comparable to the electron field-effect 
mobility of strontium titanate perovskites [429]. We note that an electron mobility of 396 cm2 
V-1 s-1 has been reported from MAPbI3 TFTs at room temperature [432], but there is uncertainty 
on whether this was overestimated. Recently, tin-based perovskite TFTs have been 
demonstrated with hole field-effect mobilities exceeding those of lead-based perovskites [431]. 
This was achieved by Matshushima et al. using the same material previously reported by Mitzi 
et al. Critical improvements were: 1) the passivation of the surface of PEA2SnI4 with self-
assembled monolayers of NH3I-SAM, and 2) the development of the top-gate, top-source/drain 
device structure (Figure 26a) to ensure both surfaces are passivated. These led to minimal 
hysteresis in the transfer curves (Figure 26b), with the hole field-effect mobilities reaching 
15 cm2 V-1 s-1 [433] and on/off ratios reaching 106. p-type TFTs are especially important 
because CMOS requires both n- and p-type TFTs, and fewer options for high-performing p-
type TFTs are currently available. The hole mobility of MASnI3 single crystals has been found 
to be at least an order of magnitude larger than the field-effect mobilities achieved thus far113
(refer to Section 3), and it is expected that the in-plane mobility of 2D (PEA)2SnI4 is 
comparably high [433]. Thus, future improvements in the hole field-effect mobility could be 
expected. However, (PEA)2SnI4 has low stability, and TFTs have been found to degrade 
quickly, even when they are in high vacuum or inside a glovebox [434]. Improved stability was 
achieved by replacing PEA with the -conjugated oligothiphene ligand 4Tm (4Tm = 2-(3” ’,4’-
dimethyl-[2,2’:5’,2”:5”,2”’-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethan-1-ammonium). (4Tm)2SnI4 perovskite 
TFTs were found to retain their performance after storage in air for a month. TFTs were made 
using a bottom gate, top-source/drain structure, which gave a hole field-effect mobility of 
2.32 cm2 V-1 s-1 and an on/off ratio of 105–106. While the field-effect mobility is lower than 
that reported by Matshushima et al., a different structure was used; (PEA)2SnI4 TFTs made in 
the same structure as the (4Tm)2SnI4 TFTs had a field-effect mobility of 0.15 cm2 V-1 s-1, with 
an on/off ratio of 104–105 [434]. 
 
 
Figure 26. (PEA)2SnI4 perovskite TFTs: (a) Device structure and (b) transfer curves. 
Reprinted with permission from Matshushima et al. [433]. Copyright 2016 by Wiley.  
 
Memristors are devices with variable resistance states, which depend on the applied voltage 
and current history [435]. Such devices were first proposed as a fourth fundamental circuit114
element in 1971 (along with resistors, inductors and capacitors) [436], and realized in 2008 
[437]. These variable resistance states can be used for high-density memory storage, logical 
computations, as well as for neuromorphic computing [435]. Such devices switch between 
resistance states through the application of an electric field. As such, memristors have low 
power consumption and retain their resistance states after the electric field has been removed, 
which contrasts to common commercial non-volatile memory (e.g., NAND flash [438]). The 
key requirements for memristors are 1) rapid switching between the high and low resistance 
states, 2) low operating voltage (for set/reset and read), 3) large ratio in resistance of the on 
and off states (on/off ratio), 4) large endurance (number of switching cycles in which the 
resistance states are maintained), and 5) long retention time [402] of the resistance states after 
power has been removed. Thin film memristors are typically comprised of an insulator 
sandwiched between two degenerate contacts (e.g., metal-insulator-metal structure). Wide 
band gap oxides are commonly used for the insulator layer, such as TaOx, HfO2 and SrRuO3, 
which have achieved on/off ratios ranging from 10 to 103, endurances ranging from 103–1010 
cycles, and retention times between 104 s and 10 y [402]. Lead-halide perovskites (MAPbI3, 
CsPbBr3 and 2D perovskites, among others) have recently been demonstrated to exhibit 
resistive switching, with high on/off ratios reaching 107 and rapid switching between resistance 
states (640 s) but lower endurances of up to 3000 cycles. Retention times up to 105 s have 
been measured, but the set/reset voltages are lower than their oxide counterparts (which 
commonly have set/reset voltages with absolute values exceeding 1 V) [402]. But as with many 
other optoelectronic device applications, the need eliminate toxic lead from memristors has 
motivated the exploration of perovskite-inspired materials for resistive switching [435, 438–
440].115
The wide band gaps of many perovskite-inspired materials leads to a low dark resistance, which 
is advantageous for achieving a high resistance in the off state. The ability to process these 
materials using low temperature, facile methods is also advantageous and makes the materials 
compatible with flexible substrates [438]. At the same time, these materials have low formation 
energies for vacancies (especially halides), which can act as conductive filaments in resistive 
switching [439]. This ionic vacancy conduction mechanism (known as valence change 
memory) has been identified in MASnBr3, CsSnI3 and Cs3Sb2Br9 memristors [435, 438, 439] 
using inert Au electrodes. For MASnBr3 and Cs3Sb2Br9, the conducting filaments are attributed 
to bromide vacancies [435, 439]. When a bias exceeding the set voltage is applied, Br- 
accumulate at the anode, while bromide vacancies form and accumulate at the cathode [435, 
439]. The Br- may be oxidized to Br atoms that are stored in the inert electrode [435]. The 
bromide vacancies have a low activation energy barrier to migration (0.22–0.57 eV), and these 
vacancies can form a conductive channel bridging the two electrodes, resulting in the 
memristor switching from the high to low resistance state. Composition and Raman 
measurements have shown that the segregation of Br occurs. Applying a negative reset voltage 
causes the Br atoms to diffuse away from the electrode they were stored at and recombine with 
the halide vacancies, causing the conductive filaments to rupture and the memristor return to 
the high resistance state [435, 439]. The conductive filaments for CsSnI3 has been attributed to 
tin vacancies, which form and are removed in a similar manner to bromide vacancies [438]. 
Valence change memory has also been suggested as the mechanism for resistive switching in 
BiOI memristors, which are believed to form conductive filaments through oxygen vacancies 
[441].  
 
An alternative to valence change memory for the formation of conductive filaments is through 
electrochemical metallization (ECM), in which a reactive metal anode (often Ag) is oxidized116
when an electric field is applied. The metal cations are the conductive filament and migrate 
through the solid film electrolyte to the cathode, where they are reduced and electrocrystallize 
to form the metal again. To reset the device from the low to high resistance state, a negative 
bias is applied, which results in the dissolution of the conducting filaments through Joule-
heating assisted dissolution [438]. This ECM mechanism was found to occur in CsSnI3 and 
Cs3Cu2I5 memristors with Ag top electrodes. In both devices, a layer of polymethyl 
methacrylate (PMMA) was spin coated over the perovskite-inspired materials to improve its 
stability in ambient air, as well as preventing the reaction between Ag and the iodide-based 
thin film, which is important for improving the endurance of the devices [438, 440]. The 
PMMA layer did not act as a barrier to silver dissolution and migration, allowing resistive 
switching to occur. Han et al. compared CsSnI3 memristors using Ag vs. Au electrodes to 
compare the ECM and VCM mechanisms. They found the memristors operating based on ECM 
to give improved on/off ratios (>1000) and low set/reset voltages of 0.13 V and -0.08 V (with 
an electroforming voltage of 0.36 V), whereas VCM memristors gave improved retention (104 
s [438]). 
 
To summarize the devices discussed in Section 5, a comparison of the state-of-the-art 
performance of perovskite-inspired materials across all applications is given in Table 5. 
 
Table 5. State-of-the-art performance of perovskite-inspired materials in the applications 
covered in Section 5 
Application 
Active material 
Performance 
properties 
Performance 
values 
Ref. 
Phosphor for 
white-light 
LEDs 
Cs2(Ag0.6Na0.4)InCl6with 
0.04% Bi3+ 
PLQE 
CIE coordinates 
Color 
temperature 
86±5% 
(0.396,0.448) 
4054 
[277] 
LED 
FPMAI-MAPb0.6Sn0.4I3 
PLQE 
-  
[367]117
EQE 
EL wavelength 
EL FWHM 
5.0 
917 
80 nm 
Photocatalysis 
Cs3Sb2Br9 nanocrystals 
Precursor 
Light source 
Product 
Yield 
CO2 (g) 
1 sun AM 1.5G 
CO 
516 μmol g-1 (5 h) 
[385] 
X-ray detector 
MA3Bi2I9 single crystals 
μτ 
Sensitivity 
Lowest 
detectable dose 
rate 
~10-3 cm2 V-1 
1.1 × 104 
0.0006 
[186] 
Gamma-ray 
detector 
Sb:BiI3 single crystals 
μτ 
Energy 
resolution 
10-4 
2.2% (662 keV) 
[404] 
α-particle 
detector 
Sb:BiI3 single crystals 
Energy 
resolution 
33 – 66% (5.5 
MeV) 
[246] 
Thin film 
transistor 
(C6H5C2H4NH3)2SnI4 
thin films 
Hole mobility 
 
Threshold 
voltage 
ION/IOFF 
12±1 (max. 15) cm2 
V-1 s-1 
-22±2 
 
(1.9±2.1)  106  
[433] 
Memristor 
CsSnI3 (orthorhombic 
phase; Ag top electrode) 
SET voltage 
RESET voltage 
On/off ratio 
Endurance 
Retention time  
0.13 V 
-0.08 V 
>103  
>600 cycles 
> 7  103 s 
[438] 
 
6 Conclusions and Outlook 
Lead-halide perovskites have developed at an unprecedented rate in photovoltaics due to an 
ideal set of optoelectronic properties. Among these properties is its tolerance to point defects, 
which allows perovskite devices to achieve high efficiencies despite being processed at low 
temperature using simple fabrication methods that give rise to high densities of point defects. 
This contrasts to traditional semiconductors, such as silicon and III-V compounds, and has 
spurred efforts to identify ‘perovskite-inspired materials’ that could replicate the exceptional 
optoelectronic properties of LHPs, but which are free from the toxicity burden of lead and118
which are also more thermally and environmentally stable. The effort to develop PIMs is a 
multi-disciplinary challenge involving theorists, experimentalists and device engineers. 
 
For theorists, the primary challenges have been: 1) unveiling the origins of the tolerance of 
LHPs to point defects, and 2) developing improved approaches to design PIMs [442]. As 
discussed in Section 2.2, defect tolerance is a phenomenon that rarely originates from any 
single material property. Indeed, there are several factors which can contribute to the defect 
tolerance of a material, each with different levels of efficacy and rarity. To achieve the 
remarkable defect tolerance of LHPs, successful PIMs will likely be required to replicate the 
wealth of ‘defect-tolerant’ material properties exhibited by LHPs (atypical band structure, 
strong dielectric screening, anharmonic carrier capture etc.). Through deeper understanding of 
defect-tolerant properties and their inter-relationships, as well as extending the materials 
discovery abstraction pyramid (Figure 2) to the explicit treatment of crystal defects, the 
accuracy of predictions for next-generation, high-performance PIMs will be improved 
immensely.  
 
For materials design, recent years have witnessed an explosion in the popularity of data mining 
(materials informatics) and machine learning procedures, which promise to revolutionize the 
materials discovery process [34, 41, 442]. An inspiring, prototypical example is the use of text 
mining and natural language processing to extract previously-hidden insights from the vast 
dataset of materials science literature. In 2019, Ceder et al. exemplified this concept by 
retrieving nearly 20 000 “codified synthesis recipes" from over 50 000 paragraphs in the recent 
solid-state literature [443]. In addition to pure data mining, the integration of physics-based 
machine learning (ML) models into the high-throughput screening process could significantly 
augment the power and efficiency of materials discovery. For instance, by implementing 
accurate ML models of material stability and chemical descriptors as a pre-screening step,119
before the application of expensive electronic structure theory (i.e. DFT), the computational 
load could be considerably reduced, thereby accelerating the process and affording the use of 
expanded input compositional space [442]. Moreover, ML techniques may be leveraged to 
uncover subtle chemical trends in successful candidate materials (e.g. defect-tolerant material 
properties), which may not be initially apparent to the ‘human eye’ [41]. Indeed, the ability to 
physically interpret trained ML models and distinguish causation from correlation is an 
ongoing area of research [444]. 
 
For materials scientists, chemists, physicists and engineers, one of the main challenges has 
been to develop suitable fabrication methods for each class of materials. A wide range of 
methods have been investigated, from solution processing to chemical and physical vapor 
deposition (which can be used at scale), through to ‘hybrid’ methods that combine both 
solution- and vapor-based processing. A series of dedicated efforts has led to pinhole-free thin 
films being achieved across a wide range of materials, with methods to control the grain size 
and preferred orientation demonstrated, which all have led to improvements in the performance 
of the materials in devices. Furthermore, it has been widely shown across many families of 
PIMs that the materials are more stable thermally and in air compared to LHPs (e.g., 
Cs2AgBiBr6 and BiOI). There are a handful of exceptions, namely tin- and germanium-based 
perovskites, as well as InI (owing to In being unstable in the +1 oxidation state). But the 
incorporation of additives and developing 2D structures have been utilized to enhance their 
ambient stability. Critically, defect tolerance has been demonstrated computationally across 
several materials, such as BiOI, CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2. 
 
One of the challenges across many PIMs is their wide band gaps, which are not suitable for 
single-junction photovoltaic devices. Although these materials may be used as top-cells in120
tandems, recent work has shown these materials to also hold significant promise in applications 
beyond PV. For example, in light-emission applications, photocatalysis and radiation detectors, 
wide band gaps of 2 eV or larger are advantageous, which compounded with the stability of 
these materials, makes them of practical interest for these applications. For example, inorganic 
double perovskites have been demonstrated as efficient, stable white-light emitters, which will 
be important for solid-state lighting. Many PIMs have suitable band positions to reduce H+ or 
CO2, and Cs3Sb2Br9 nanocrystals were demonstrated to more efficiently reduce CO2 than 
CsPbBr3. In radiation detectors, the wide band gap of PIMs results in low dark current, which 
is important for them to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio, with a low lowest detectable dose 
rate, down to 0.6 nGyair s-1 in MA3Bi2I9. This is smaller than the lowest dose detectable by 
MAPbBr3 as well as standard X-ray detectors, such as a-Se and CZT, and will allow lower and 
safer doses of X-rays to be used in security equipment or in medical screening. Furthermore, 
the composition of PIMs of high atomic number elements allows these materials to have high 
stopping power for radiation, which in turn results in sensitivities to X-rays being comparable 
to MAPbBr3 and orders of magnitude larger than conventional Si, a-Se and CZT materials. The 
high resistivities of PIMs owing to their wide band gap is also advantageous for achieving a 
high resistance ‘off’ state in memristors, and on/off ratios comparable to or larger than 
conventional oxide-based materials have been reported. The exploration of PIMs in these 
electronic applications is still in the nascent stages, but there are already very promising signs 
of the potential of these low-toxicity materials to give stable, efficient performance.  
 
However, an important challenge faced by the field is the limited mobility of some PIMs. Many 
PIMs either have a 0D crystal structure (e.g., Cs3Bi2I9), or a 0D electronic structure (e.g., 
Cs2AgBiBr6), which limits mobilities and drift/diffusion lengths. Furthermore, these lower-
dimensional materials have higher exciton binding energies, as well as soft lattices and strong121
electron-phonon coupling. These factors further restrict mobilities due to the formation of 
excitons (which need to be split to free carriers), as well as polarons or self-trapped excitons.  
This limits the current densities and efficiencies in PVs, as well as the  product of PIM single 
crystals, which are lower than in standard radiation detector materials. The main exception to 
the low mobilities in PIMs are tin-based perovskites, which have disperse bands. Indeed, this 
has resulted in these materials achieving field-effect mobilities comparable to LHPs in p-type 
TFTs.  
 
Many PIMs also have crystal structures based on low dimensional networks (e.g. 1D and 2D 
connectivity), which leads to certain crystallographic orientations having higher mobility. This 
anisotropy in carrier transport necessitates careful control over the preferred orientation of the 
materials in thin films, such that: 1) the high mobility directions connect both electrodes in 
devices, while 2) also maintaining a compact morphology that does not lead to shunting. For 
example, BiOI has a layered structure, and a {012} preferred orientation is desirable to connect 
the top and bottom electrodes in vertically-structured PV devices. But this open structure leads 
to low shunt resistances, which limits open-circuit voltages. New device structures or strategies 
that allow high mobility and high shunt resistance to be simultaneously achieved are needed. 
 
Beyond these materials and fabrication challenges, further efforts are needed to identify the 
cause of defect tolerance. While some ns2 compounds have been found to be defect tolerant, 
others have been found to have deep traps, e.g., BiI3 and SbI3. A deeper understanding of defect 
tolerance will be necessary to develop increasingly refined, accurate, and comprehensive 
design principles, and thus more efficient, targeted screening procedures. On the computational 
front, recent advances in theory and technology have enabled both the qualitative and 
quantitative descriptions of bulk and defect-related material properties from ab-initio122
modelling. Overcoming the challenges associated with complex defect calculations (Section 
2.3.5) will facilitate accurate prediction and validation of promising candidate materials, 
alongside enhanced understanding of experimental results and defect behavior.  
 
Ultimately, for future research efforts in materials discovery to be successful, consensus and 
consistency with selection metrics will be immensely beneficial, allowing greater 
transferability and comparability between studies. For similar reasons, alongside the reduction 
of duplicate work, the facilitation of sharing both data and methodologies should be 
vehemently encouraged. Frameworks which automate this process (e.g. AiiDA [102] for 
materials modelling), maintaining data provenance and reproducibility, will be especially 
advantageous in this regard. This effort should not be limited to only computational data, but 
also experimental data (e.g., optical and transport measurements) and synthesis details. This 
will help to refine computational models, as well as providing ‘training’ datasets for more 
general ML models. Overall, the future of PIMs research will require an interlinked, synergistic 
approach between theory and experiment in order to identify further promising materials. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Yi-Teng Huang acknowledges funding from Education Ministry of Taiwan Government as 
well as Downing College Cambridge. Seán R. Kavanagh acknowledges funding from the 
EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Advanced Characterisation of Materials (CDT-ACM)( 
EP/S023259/1), as well as the use of VESTA [445] (for crystal structure visualization) and 
Freepik.com (for vector image templates) in the preparation of Figure 2. D.O.S. acknowledges 
support from the European Research Council, ERC (Grant 758345).  This work was supported 
by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government 
(MSIT) (No. 2018R1C1B6008728). R.L.Z.H. acknowledges support from the Royal Academy123
of Engineering under the Research Fellowships scheme (No. RF\201718/1701), Downing 
College Cambridge via the Kim and Juliana Silverman Research Fellowship, and the Isaac 
Newton Trust (Minute 19.07(d)). 
 
ORCID IDs 
Yi-Teng Huang https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4576-2338 
Seán R. Kavanagh https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4577-9647 
David O. Scanlon https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9174-8601 
Aron Walsh https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5460-7033 
Robert L. Z. Hoye https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7675-0065 
 
References 
1. 
Haegel, N. M. et al. Terawatt-scale photovoltaics: Transform global energy. Science 
364, 836–838 (2019). 
2. 
Hermann, W. A. Quantifying global exergy resources. Energy 31, 1685–1702 (2006). 
3. 
Kurtz, S. R. et al. Revisiting the Terawatt Challenge. MRS Bull. 45, 159–164 (2020). 
4. 
Needleman, D. B. et al. Economically sustainable scaling of photovoltaics to meet 
climate targets. Energy Environ. Sci. 9, 2122–2129 (2016). 
5. 
Mathews, I., Kantareddy, S. N., Buonassisi, T. & Peters, I. M. Technology and Market 
Perspective for Indoor Photovoltaic Cells. Joule 3, 1415–1426 (2019). 
6. 
Polman, A., Knight, M., Garnett, E. C., Ehrler, B. & Sinke, W. C. Photovoltaic 
materials: Present efficiencies and future challenges. Science 352, (2016). 
7. 
T, M., A, K., K, T. & Y, S. Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers 
for photovoltaic cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 6050–6051 (2009). 
8. 
Yoo, J. J. et al. An interface stabilized perovskite solar cell with high stabilized124
efficiency and low voltage loss. Energy Environ. Sci. 12, 2192–2199 (2019). 
9. 
Laboratory, N. R. E. Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart. (2019). 
10. 
Mailoa, J. P. et al. A 2-terminal perovskite/silicon multijunction solar cell enabled by a 
silicon tunnel junction. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, (2015). 
11. 
Bailie, C. D. et al. Semi-transparent perovskite solar cells for tandems with silicon and 
CIGS. Energy Environ. Sci. 8, 956–963 (2015). 
12. 
Lin, R. et al. Monolithic all-perovskite tandem solar cells with 24.8% efficiency 
exploiting comproportionation to suppress Sn(ii) oxidation in precursor ink. Nat. 
Energy 4, 864–873 (2019). 
13. 
Li, Z. et al. Cost Analysis of Perovskite Tandem Photovoltaics. Joule 2, 1559–1572 
(2018). 
14. 
Dagar, J., Castro-Hermosa, S., Lucarelli, G., Cacialli, F. & Brown, T. M. Highly 
efficient perovskite solar cells for light harvesting under indoor illumination via 
solution processed SnO2/MgO composite electron transport layers. Nano Energy 49, 
290–299 (2018). 
15. 
Babayigit, A., Ethirajan, A., Muller, M. & Conings, B. Toxicity of organometal halide 
perovskite solar cells. Nat. Mater. 15, 247–251 (2016). 
16. 
Bush, K. A. et al. 23.6%-Efficient Monolithic Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Solar Cells 
With Improved Stability. Nat. Energy 2, 1–7 (2017). 
17. 
Walsh, A. & Stranks, S. D. Taking Control of Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite Solar 
Cells. ACS Energy Lett. 3, 1983–1990 (2018). 
18. 
Ganose, A. M., Savory, C. N. & Scanlon, D. O. Beyond methylammonium lead iodide: 
prospects for the emergent field of ns2 containing solar absorbers. Chem. Commun. 53, 
20–44 (2017). 
19. 
Lee, L. C., Huq, T. N., Macmanus-Driscoll, J. L. & Hoye, R. L. Z. Research Update:125
Bismuth-based perovskite-inspired photovoltaic materials. APL Mater. 6, (2018). 
20. 
Hoye, R. L. Z. et al. Perovskite-Inspired Photovoltaic Materials: Toward Best 
Practices in Materials Characterization and Calculations. Chem. Mater. 29, 1964–1988 
(2017). 
21. 
Brandt, R. E. et al. Searching for ‘defect-Tolerant’ Photovoltaic Materials: Combined 
Theoretical and Experimental Screening. Chem. Mater. 29, 4667–4674 (2017). 
22. 
Noel, N. K. et al. Lead-free organic–inorganic tin halide perovskites for photovoltaic 
applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 3061–3068 (2014). 
23. 
Igbari, F., Wang, Z. K. & Liao, L. S. Progress of Lead-Free Halide Double 
Perovskites. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1–32 (2019). 
24. 
Correa-Baena, J. P. et al. A-Site Cation in Inorganic A3Sb2I9 Perovskite Influences 
Structural Dimensionality, Exciton Binding Energy, and Solar Cell Performance. 
Chem. Mater. 30, 3734–3742 (2018). 
25. 
Rosales, B. A., White, M. A. & Vela, J. Solution-Grown Sodium Bismuth 
Dichalcogenides: Toward Earth-Abundant, Biocompatible Semiconductors. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 140, 3736–3742 (2018). 
26. 
Swarnkar, A. et al. Are Chalcogenide Perovskites an Emerging Class of 
Semiconductors for Optoelectronic Properties and Solar Cell? †. Chem. Mater. 31, 
565–575 (2019). 
27. 
Zhang, W.-B., Xiang, L.-J. & Li, H.-B. Theoretical perspective of energy harvesting 
properties of atomically thin BiI 3. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 19086–19094 (2016). 
28. 
Audzijonis, A. et al. Electronic structure of the BiSI cluster. Phys. B Condens. Matter 
391, 22–27 (2007). 
29. 
Ke, W., Stoumpos, C. C. & Kanatzidis, M. G. “Unleaded” Perovskites: Status Quo and 
Future Prospects of Tin-Based Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Mater. 31, (2019).126
30. 
Wei, Q. et al. Synthesis of easily transferred 2D layered BiI3 nanoplates for flexible 
visible-light photodetectors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 21527–21533 (2018). 
31. 
Wang, W., Huang, G., Jimmy, C. Y. & Wong, P. K. Advances in photocatalytic 
disinfection of bacteria: development of photocatalysts and mechanisms. J. Environ. 
Sci. 34, 232–247 (2015). 
32. 
Wu, Y. et al. Organic--inorganic hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite materials as channels 
in thin-film field-effect transistors. RSC Adv. 6, 16243–16249 (2016). 
33. 
Alberi, K. et al. The 2019 materials by design roadmap. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 52, 
13001 (2018). 
34. 
Davies, D. W. et al. Computational Screening of All Stoichiometric Inorganic 
Materials. Chem 1, 617–627 (2016). 
35. 
Perdew, J. P. et al. Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and 
surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, (2008). 
36. 
Cococcioni, M. & de Gironcoli, S. Linear response approach to the calculation of the 
effective interaction parameters in the LDA+U method. Phys. Rev. B 71, 35105 
(2005). 
37. 
Klimeš, J., Bowler, D. R. & Michaelides, A. Van der Waals density functionals 
applied to solids. Phys. Rev. B 83, 195131 (2011). 
38. 
Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio 
parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 
elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010). 
39. 
Jaśkaniec, S. et al. Solvent Engineering for High-Performance SnO Nanoparticles. (In 
Preparation) (2020). 
40. 
Blank, B., Kirchartz, T., Lany, S. & Rau, U. Selection Metric for Photovoltaic 
Materials Screening Based on Detailed-Balance Analysis. Phys. Rev. Appl. 8, 24032127
(2017). 
41. 
Davies, D. W. et al. Descriptors for Electron and Hole Charge Carriers in Metal 
Oxides. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11, 438–444 (2020). 
42. 
Butler, K. T., Davies, D. W. & Walsh, A. Chapter 6. Computational Design of 
Photovoltaic Materials. in Computational Materials Discovery (eds. Oganov, A. R., 
Saleh, G. & Kvashnin, A. G.) 176–197 (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2018). 
doi:10.1039/9781788010122-00176. 
43. 
Davies, D. et al. SMACT: Semiconducting Materials by Analogy and Chemical 
Theory. J. Open Source Softw. (2019) doi:10.21105/joss.01361. 
44. 
Shockley, W. & Queisser, H. J. Detailed Balance Limit of Efficiency of p‐n Junction 
Solar Cells. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 510–519 (1961). 
45. 
Yu, L. & Zunger, A. Identification of potential photovoltaic absorbers based on first-
principles spectroscopic screening of materials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 068701 (2012). 
46. 
Savory, C. N., Walsh, A. & Scanlon, D. O. Can Pb-Free Halide Double Perovskites 
Support High-Efficiency Solar Cells? ACS Energy Lett. 1, 949–955 (2016). 
47. 
Yu, L., Kokenyesi, R. S., Keszler, D. A. & Zunger, A. Inverse Design of High 
Absorption Thin-Film Photovoltaic Materials. Adv. Energy Mater. 3, 43–48 (2013). 
48. 
Kim, S. et al. Upper limit to the photovoltaic efficiency of imperfect crystals from first 
principles. Energy Environ. Sci. (2020) doi:10.1039/D0EE00291G. 
49. 
Mitzi, D. B., Gunawan, O., Todorov, T. K., Wang, K. & Guha, S. The path towards a 
high-performance solution-processed kesterite solar cell. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
95, 1421–1436 (2011). 
50. 
Yan, C. et al. Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells with over 10% power conversion efficiency 
enabled by heterojunction heat treatment. Nat. Energy 3, 764–772 (2018). 
51. 
Rau, U., Blank, B., Müller, T. C. M. & Kirchartz, T. Efficiency Potential of128
Photovoltaic Materials and Devices Unveiled by Detailed-Balance Analysis. Phys. 
Rev. Appl. 7, 44016 (2017). 
52. 
Green, M. A. Radiative efficiency of state-of-the-art photovoltaic cells. Prog. 
Photovoltaics Res. Appl. 20, 472–476 (2012). 
53. 
Nayak, P. K., Mahesh, S., Snaith, H. J. & Cahen, D. Photovoltaic solar cell 
technologies: analysing the state of the art. Nat. Rev. Mater. 4, 269 (2019). 
54. 
Walsh, A. & Zunger, A. Instilling defect tolerance in new compounds. Nat. Mater. 16, 
964–967 (2017). 
55. 
Shockley, W. & Read, W. T. Statistics of the Recombinations of Holes and Electrons. 
Phys. Rev. 87, 835–842 (1952). 
56. 
Alkauskas, A., McCluskey, M. D. & Van de Walle, C. G. Tutorial: Defects in 
semiconductors—Combining experiment and theory. J. Appl. Phys. 119, 181101 
(2016). 
57. 
Das, B., Aguilera, I., Rau, U. & Kirchartz, T. What is a deep defect? Combining 
Shockley-Read-Hall statistics with multiphonon recombination theory. Phys. Rev. 
Mater. 4, 14 (2020). 
58. 
Zhang, S. B., Wei, S.-H., Zunger, A. & Katayama-Yoshida, H. Defect physics of the 
${\mathrm{CuInSe}}_{2}$ chalcopyrite semiconductor. Phys. Rev. B 57, 9642–9656 
(1998). 
59. 
Zakutayev, A. et al. Defect tolerant semiconductors for solar energy conversion. J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 1117–1125 (2014). 
60. 
Giorgi, G. & Yamashita, K. Theoretical Modeling of Organohalide Perovskites for 
Photovoltaic Applications. (CRC Press, 2017). 
61. 
Das Sarma, S. & Madhukar, A. Study of the ideal-vacancy-induced neutral deep levels 
in III-V compound semiconductors and their ternary alloys. Phys. Rev. B 24, 2051–129
2068 (1981). 
62. 
Shi, H. & Du, M.-H. Shallow halogen vacancies in halide optoelectronic materials. 
Phys. Rev. B 90, 174103 (2014). 
63. 
Shi, H., Ming, W. & Du, M.-H. Bismuth chalcohalides and oxyhalides as 
optoelectronic materials. Phys. Rev. B 93, 104108 (2016). 
64. 
Kim, J., Chung, C.-H. & Hong, K.-H. Understanding of the formation of shallow level 
defects from the intrinsic defects of lead tri-halide perovskites. Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys. 18, 27143–27147 (2016). 
65. 
Kurchin, R. C., Gorai, P., Buonassisi, T. & Stevanović, V. Structural and Chemical 
Features Giving Rise to Defect Tolerance of Binary Semiconductors. Chem. Mater. 30, 
5583–5592 (2018). 
66. 
Maughan, A. E. et al. Defect tolerance to intolerance in the vacancy-ordered double 
perovskite semiconductors Cs2SnI6 and Cs2TeI6. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 8453–8464 
(2016). 
67. 
Kim, J., Lee, S.-H., Lee, J. H. & Hong, K.-H. The Role of Intrinsic Defects in 
Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 1312–1317 (2014). 
68. 
Kim, S., Park, J.-S., Hood, S. N. & Walsh, A. Lone-pair effect on carrier capture in Cu 
2 ZnSnS 4 solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 2686–2693 (2019). 
69. 
Landsberg, P. T. Recombination in Semiconductors. Cambridge Core (1992). 
70. 
Walsh, A., Sokol, A. A., Buckeridge, J., Scanlon, D. O. & Catlow, C. R. A. Oxidation 
states and ionicity. Nat. Mater. (2018) doi:10.1038/s41563-018-0165-7. 
71. 
Yang, J.-H., Yin, W.-J., Park, J.-S., Ma, J. & Wei, S.-H. Review on first-principles 
study of defect properties of CdTe as a solar cell absorber. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 31, 
83002 (2016). 
72. 
Steirer, K. X. et al. Defect Tolerance in Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite.130
ACS Energy Lett. 1, 360–366 (2016). 
73. 
Alkauskas, A., Dreyer, C. E., Lyons, J. L. & Van de Walle, C. G. Role of excited 
states in Shockley-Read-Hall recombination in wide-band-gap semiconductors. Phys. 
Rev. B 93, 201304 (2016). 
74. 
Zhang, X., Turiansky, M. E. & Van de Walle, C. G. Correctly Assessing Defect 
Tolerance in Halide Perovskites. J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 6022–6027 (2020). 
75. 
Xiao, Z., Meng, W., Wang, J., Mitzi, D. B. & Yan, Y. Searching for promising new 
perovskite-based photovoltaic absorbers: the importance of electronic dimensionality. 
Mater. Horizons 4, 206–216 (2017). 
76. 
Brandt, R. E., Stevanović, V., Ginley, D. S. & Buonassisi, T. Identifying defect-
tolerant semiconductors with high minority-carrier lifetimes: Beyond hybrid lead 
halide perovskites. MRS Commun. 5, 265–275 (2015). 
77. 
Whalley, L. D., Frost, J. M., Jung, Y.-K. & Walsh, A. Perspective: Theory and 
simulation of hybrid halide           perovskites. J. Chem. Phys. 146, 220901 (2017). 
78. 
Pyykkö, P. Relativistic Effects in Structural Chemistry. Chem. Rev. 88, 563–594 
(1988). 
79. 
Li, Z. et al. Bandgap Lowering in Mixed Alloys of Cs2Ag(SbxBi1-x)Br6 Double 
Perovskite Thin Films. ACS Energy Lett. Submitted, (2020). 
80. 
García-Espejo, G., Rodríguez-Padrón, D., Luque, R., Camacho, L. & De Miguel, G. 
Mechanochemical synthesis of three double perovskites: Cs2AgBiBr6, 
(CH3NH3)2TlBiBr6 and Cs2AgSbBr6. Nanoscale 11, 16650–16657 (2019). 
81. 
Kim, S. & Walsh, A. Comment on ‘Low-frequency lattice phonons in halide 
perovskites explain high defect tolerance toward electron-hole recombination’. 
arXiv:2003.05394 [cond-mat] (2020). 
82. 
Chu, W., Zheng, Q., Prezhdo, O. V, Zhao, J. & Saidi, W. A. Response to Comment on131
‘Low-frequency lattice phonons in halide perovskites explain high defect tolerance 
toward electron-hole recombination’. (2020). 
83. 
Yin, W.-J., Shi, T. & Yan, Y. Unusual defect physics in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite 
solar cell absorber. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 63903 (2014). 
84. 
Green, M. A., Ho-Baillie, A. & Snaith, H. J. The emergence of perovskite solar cells. 
Nat. Photonics 8, 506–514 (2014). 
85. 
Berry, J. et al. Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Perovskites (HOIPs): Opportunities and 
Challenges. Adv. Mater. 27, 5102–5112 (2015). 
86. 
Kirchartz, T., Markvart, T., Rau, U. & Egger, D. A. Impact of Small Phonon Energies 
on the Charge-Carrier Lifetimes in Metal-Halide Perovskites. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 
939–946 (2018). 
87. 
Dereń, P. J., Bednarkiewicz, A., Goldner, P. & Guillot-Noël, O. Laser action in 
LaAlO3:Nd3+ single crystal. J. Appl. Phys. 103, 43102 (2008). 
88. 
Yang, W. S. et al. Iodide management in formamidinium-lead-halide-based perovskite 
layers for efficient solar cells. Science 356, 1376–1379 (2017). 
89. 
Kuganathan, N. & Islam, M. S. Li2MnSiO4 Lithium Battery Material: Atomic-Scale 
Study of Defects, Lithium Mobility, and Trivalent Dopants. Chem. Mater. 21, 5196–
5202 (2009). 
90. 
Freysoldt, C. et al. First-principles calculations for point defects in solids. Rev. Mod. 
Phys. (2014) doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.86.253. 
91. 
Kim, S., Hood, S. N., Park, J.-S., Whalley, L. D. & Walsh, A. Quick-start guide for 
first-principles modelling of point defects in crystalline materials. (2020). 
92. 
Kohn, W. & Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and 
Correlation Effects. Phys. Rev. 140, A1133–A1138 (1965). 
93. 
Hohenberg, P. & Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. 136, B864–B871132
(1964). 
94. 
Goyal, A., Gorai, P., Peng, H., Lany, S. & Stevanović, V. A computational framework 
for automation of point defect calculations. Comput. Mater. Sci. 130, 1–9 (2017). 
95. 
Kavanagh, S. kavanase (Seán Kavanagh) - GitHub. https://github.com/kavanase. 
96. 
Broberg, D. et al. PyCDT: A Python toolkit for modeling point defects in 
semiconductors and insulators. Comput. Phys. Commun. 226, 165–179 (2018). 
97. 
Naik, M. H. & Jain, M. CoFFEE: Corrections For Formation Energy and Eigenvalues 
for charged defect simulations. Comput. Phys. Commun. 226, 114–126 (2018). 
98. 
Freysoldt, C., Neugebauer, J. & Van de Walle, C. G. Fully Ab Initio Finite-Size 
Corrections for Charged-Defect Supercell Calculations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 16402 
(2009). 
99. 
Kim, S., Hood, S. N., Gerwen, P. van, Whalley, L. D. & Walsh, A. CarrierCapture.jl: 
Anharmonic Carrier Capture. (2020). 
100. Buckeridge, J., Scanlon, D. O., Walsh, A. & Catlow, C. R. A. Automated procedure to 
determine the thermodynamic stability of a material and the range of chemical 
potentials necessary for its formation relative to competing phases and compounds. 
Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 330–338 (2014). 
101. Buckeridge, J. Equilibrium point defect and charge carrier concentrations in a material 
determined through calculation of the self-consistent Fermi energy. Comput. Phys. 
Commun. 244, 329–342 (2019). 
102. Pizzi, G., Cepellotti, A., Sabatini, R., Marzari, N. & Kozinsky, B. AiiDA: automated 
interactive infrastructure and database for computational science. Comput. Mater. Sci. 
111, 218–230 (2016). 
103. Jain, A. et al. FireWorks: a dynamic workflow system designed for high-throughput 
applications. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 27, 5037–5059 (2015).133
104. Kim, S., Hood, S. N. & Walsh, A. Anharmonic lattice relaxation during nonradiative 
carrier capture. Phys. Rev. B 100, 41202 (2019). 
105. Alkauskas, A., Yan, Q. & Van De Walle, C. G. First-principles theory of nonradiative 
carrier capture via multiphonon emission. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 
Phys. 90, 075202 (2014). 
106. Zhao, Y. & Zhu, K. Organic-inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites for 
optoelectronic and electronic applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 45, 655–689 (2016). 
107. Travis, W., Glover, E. N. K., Bronstein, H., Scanlon, D. O. & Palgrave, R. G. On the 
application of the tolerance factor to inorganic and hybrid halide perovskites: A 
revised system. Chem. Sci. 7, 4548–4556 (2016). 
108. Becker, M., Klüner, T. & Wark, M. Formation of hybrid ABX3 perovskite compounds 
for solar cell application: first-principles calculations of effective ionic radii and 
determination of tolerance factors. Dalt. Trans. 46, 3500–3509 (2017). 
109. Sun, Y., Peng, J., Chen, Y., Yao, Y. & Liang, Z. Triple-cation mixed-halide 
perovskites: towards efficient, annealing-free and air-stable solar cells enabled by Pb 
(SCN) 2 additive. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–7 (2017). 
110. Dunlap-Shohl, W. A., Hill, I. G., Yan, Y. & Mitzi, D. B. Photovoltaic Effect in Indium 
(I) Iodide Thin Films. Chem. Mater. 30, 8226–8232 (2018). 
111. Eya, H. I., Ntsoenzok, E. & Dzade, N. Y. First--Principles Investigation of the 
Structural, Elastic, Electronic, and Optical Properties of α--and β--SrZrS3: 
Implications for Photovoltaic Applications. Materials (Basel). 13, 978 (2020). 
112. Huang, H. et al. Tunable 3D hierarchical graphene--BiOI nanoarchitectures: their in 
situ preparation, and highly improved photocatalytic performance and 
photoelectrochemical properties under visible light irradiation. RSC Adv. 4, 49386–
49394 (2014).134
113. Bennett, J. W., Grinberg, I. & Rappe, A. M. Effect of substituting of S for O: The 
sulfide perovskite BaZrS3 investigated with density functional theory. Phys. Rev. B 79, 
235115 (2009). 
114. Nasti, G. & Abate, A. Tin Halide Perovskite (ASnX3) Solar Cells: A Comprehensive 
Guide toward the Highest Power Conversion Efficiency. Adv. Energy Mater. 10, 
1902467 (2020). 
115. Hao, F. et al. Solvent-Mediated Crystallization of CH3NH3SnI3 Films for 
Heterojunction Depleted Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 11445–11452 
(2015). 
116. Hao, F., Stoumpos, C. C., Cao, D. H., Chang, R. P. H. & Kanatzidis, M. G. Lead-free 
solid-state organic-inorganic halide perovskite solar cells. Nat. Photonics 8, 489–494 
(2014). 
117. Jeon, N. J. et al. Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic-organic hybrid 
perovskite solar cells. Nat. Mater. 13, 897–903 (2014). 
118. Yang, M. et al. Perovskite ink with wide processing window for scalable high-
efficiency solar cells. Nat. Energy 2, 1–9 (2017). 
119. Chen, Q. et al. Planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells via vapor-assisted solution 
process. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 622–625 (2014). 
120. Ke, W. et al. Efficient fully-vacuum-processed perovskite solar cells using copper 
phthalocyanine as hole selective layers. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 23888–23894 (2015). 
121. Yu, Y. et al. Thermally evaporated methylammonium tin triiodide thin films for lead-
free perovskite solar cell fabrication. RSC Adv. 6, 90248–90254 (2016). 
122. Yokoyama, T. et al. Overcoming Short-Circuit in Lead-Free CH3NH3SnI3 Perovskite 
Solar Cells via Kinetically Controlled Gas-Solid Reaction Film Fabrication Process. J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 776–782 (2016).135
123. Kumar, M. H. et al. Lead-free halide perovskite solar cells with high photocurrents 
realized through vacancy modulation. Adv. Mater. 26, 7122–7127 (2014). 
124. Gupta, S., Bendikov, T., Hodes, G. & Cahen, D. CsSnBr3, a lead-free halide perovskite 
for long-term solar cell application: insights on SnF2 addition. ACS Energy Lett. 1, 
1028–1033 (2016). 
125. Marshall, K. P., Walker, M., Walton, R. I. & Hatton, R. A. Enhanced stability and 
efficiency in hole-transport-layer-free CsSnI3 perovskite photovoltaics. Nat. Energy 1, 
1–9 (2016). 
126. Shum, K. et al. Synthesis and characterization of CsSnI3 thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
96, 221903 (2010). 
127. Wang, L. et al. Pressure-induced structural evolution, optical and electronic transitions 
of nontoxic organometal halide perovskite-based methylammonium tin chloride. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 111, 233901 (2017). 
128. Li, Y. et al. 50% Sn-Based Planar Perovskite Solar Cell with Power Conversion 
Efficiency up to 13.6%. Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1601353 (2016). 
129. Goyal, A. et al. Origin of Pronounced Nonlinear Band Gap Behavior in Lead-Tin 
Hybrid Perovskite Alloys. Chem. Mater. 30, 3920–3928 (2018). 
130. Chung, I. et al. CsSnI 3: Semiconductor or metal? High electrical conductivity and 
strong near-infrared photoluminescence from a single material. High hole mobility and 
phase-transitions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 8579–8587 (2012). 
131. Stoumpos, C. C., Malliakas, C. D. & Kanatzidis, M. G. Semiconducting tin and lead 
iodide perovskites with organic cations: Phase transitions, high mobilities, and near-
infrared photoluminescent properties. Inorg. Chem. 52, 9019–9038 (2013). 
132. Milot, R. L. et al. The effects of doping density and temperature on the optoelectronic 
properties of formamidinium tin triiodide thin films. Adv. Mater. 30, 1804506 (2018).136
133. Wu, B. et al. Long Minority-Carrier Diffusion Length and Low Surface-
Recombination Velocity in Inorganic Lead-Free CsSnI3 Perovskite Crystal for Solar 
Cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, (2017). 
134. Parrott, E. S. et al. Effect of structural phase transition on charge-carrier lifetimes and 
defects in CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 1321–1326 (2016). 
135. Ke, W. et al. Enhanced photovoltaic performance and stability with a new type of 
hollow 3D perovskite {en}FASnI3. Sci. Adv. 3, 1–10 (2017). 
136. Ma, L. et al. Carrier Diffusion Lengths of over 500 nm in Lead-Free Perovskite 
CH3NH3SnI3 Films. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 14750–14755 (2016). 
137. Bowman, A. R. et al. Microsecond Carrier Lifetimes, Controlled p-Doping, and 
Enhanced Air Stability in Low-Bandgap Metal Halide Perovskites. ACS energy Lett. 4, 
2301–2307 (2019). 
138. Zhao, B. et al. High Open-Circuit Voltages in Tin-Rich Low-Bandgap Perovskite-
Based Planar Heterojunction Photovoltaics. Adv. Mater. 29, 1604744 (2017). 
139. Kopacic, I. et al. Enhanced Performance of Germanium Halide Perovskite Solar Cells 
through Compositional Engineering. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 1, 343–347 (2018). 
140. Stoumpos, C. C. et al. Hybrid germanium iodide perovskite semiconductors: Active 
lone pairs, structural distortions, direct and indirect energy gaps, and strong nonlinear 
optical properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 6804–6819 (2015). 
141. Krishnamoorthy, T. et al. Lead-free germanium iodide perovskite materials for 
photovoltaic applications. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 23829–23832 (2015). 
142. McClure, E. T., Ball, M. R., Windl, W. & Woodward, P. M. Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Br, Cl): 
New Visible Light Absorbing, Lead-Free Halide Perovskite Semiconductors. Chem. 
Mater. 28, 1348–1354 (2016). 
143. Pantaler, M., Fettkenhauer, C., Nguyen, H. L., Anusca, I. & Lupascu, D. C. Deposition137
routes of Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskites for photovoltaic applications. MRS Adv. 3, 
1819–1823 (2018). 
144. Cheng, P. et al. Combining theory and experiment in the design of a lead-free 
((CH3NH3)2AgBiI6) double perovskite. New J. Chem. 41, 9598–9601 (2017). 
145. Wei, F. et al. Synthesis and properties of a lead-free hybrid double 
perovskite:(CH3NH3) 2AgBiBr6. Chem. Mater. 29, 1089–1094 (2017). 
146. Zhang, C. et al. Design of a novel and highly stable lead-free Cs2NaBiI6 double 
perovskite for photovoltaic application. Sustain. Energy Fuels 2, 2419–2428 (2018). 
147. Zhou, L., Xu, Y. F., Chen, B. X., Kuang, D. Bin & Su, C. Y. Synthesis and 
Photocatalytic Application of Stable Lead-Free Cs2AgBiBr6 Perovskite Nanocrystals. 
Small 14, 1–7 (2018). 
148. Creutz, S. E., Crites, E. N., De Siena, M. C. & Gamelin, D. R. Colloidal Nanocrystals 
of Lead-Free Double-Perovskite (Elpasolite) Semiconductors: Synthesis and Anion 
Exchange to Access New Materials. Nano Lett. 18, 1118–1123 (2018). 
149. Wu, C. et al. The Dawn of Lead-Free Perovskite Solar Cell: Highly Stable Double 
Perovskite Cs2AgBiBr6 Film. Adv. Sci. 5, 2–9 (2018). 
150. Gao, W. et al. High-Quality Cs2AgBiBr6 Double Perovskite Film for Lead-Free 
Inverted Planar Heterojunction Solar Cells with 2.2 % Efficiency. ChemPhysChem 19, 
1696–1700 (2018). 
151. Slavney, A. H., Hu, T., Lindenberg, A. M. & Karunadasa, H. I. A Bismuth-Halide 
Double Perovskite with Long Carrier Recombination Lifetime for Photovoltaic 
Applications. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 2138–2141 (2016). 
152. Volonakis, G. et al. Lead-Free Halide Double Perovskites via Heterovalent 
Substitution of Noble Metals. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 1254–1259 (2016). 
153. Greul, E., Petrus, M. L., Binek, A., Docampo, P. & Bein, T. Highly stable, phase pure138
Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite thin films for optoelectronic applications. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 5, 19972–19981 (2017). 
154. Hoye, R. L. Z. Z. et al. Fundamental Carrier Lifetime Exceeding 1 µs in Cs2AgBiBr6 
Double Perovskite. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 5, 2–9 (2018). 
155. Meng, W. et al. Parity-forbidden transitions and their impact on the optical absorption 
properties of lead-free metal halide perovskites and double perovskites. J. Phys. Chem. 
Lett. 8, 2999–3007 (2017). 
156. Tran, T. T., Panella, J. R., Chamorro, J. R., Morey, J. R. & McQueen, T. M. Designing 
indirect-direct bandgap transitions in double perovskites. Mater. Horizons 4, 688–693 
(2017). 
157. Bartesaghi, D. et al. Charge carrier dynamics in Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 122, 4809–4816 (2018). 
158. Pan, W. et al. Cs2AgBiBr6 single-crystal X-ray detectors with a low detection limit. 
Nat. Photonics 11, 726–732 (2017). 
159. Giesecke, J. A., Michl, B., Schindler, F., Schubert, M. C. & Warta, W. Spatially 
resolved carrier lifetime calibrated via quasi-steadystate photoluminescence. Energy 
Procedia 8, 64–70 (2011). 
160. Slavney, A. H. et al. Chemical Approaches to Addressing the Instability and Toxicity 
of Lead-Halide Perovskite Absorbers. Inorg. Chem. 56, 46–55 (2017). 
161. Xiao, Z., Du, K.-Z., Meng, W., Mitzi, D. B. & Yan, Y. Chemical Origin of the 
Stability Difference between Copper (I)-and Silver (I)-Based Halide Double 
Perovskites. Angew. Chemie 129, 12275–12279 (2017). 
162. Xiao, Z. et al. Intrinsic instability of Cs2In(I)M(III)X6 (M= Bi, Sb; X= halogen) double 
perovskites: a combined density functional theory and experimental study. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 139, 6054–6057 (2017).139
163. Perera, S. et al. Chalcogenide perovskites - an emerging class of ionic semiconductors. 
Nano Energy 22, 129–135 (2016). 
164. Meng, W. et al. Alloying and Defect Control within Chalcogenide Perovskites for 
Optimized Photovoltaic Application. Chem. Mater. 28, 821–829 (2016). 
165. Niu, S. et al. Bandgap Control via Structural and Chemical Tuning of Transition Metal 
Perovskite Chalcogenides. Adv. Mater. 29, 16–21 (2017). 
166. Wei, X. et al. Ti-alloying of BaZrS3 chalcogenide perovskite for photovoltaics. arXiv 
Prepr. arXiv2004.04261 (2020). 
167. Wei, X. et al. Realization of BaZrS3 chalcogenide perovskite thin films for 
optoelectronics. Nano Energy 68, 104317 (2020). 
168. Herz, L. M. Charge-carrier mobilities in metal halide perovskites: fundamental 
mechanisms and limits. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 1539–1548 (2017). 
169. Lee, C.-S., Kleinke, K. M. & Kleinke, H. Synthesis, structure, and electronic and 
physical properties of the two SrZrS3 modifications. Solid state Sci. 7, 1049–1054 
(2005). 
170. Crovetto, A. et al. Shining light on sulfide perovskites: LaYS3 material properties and 
solar cells. Chem. Mater. 31, 3359–3369 (2019). 
171. Peng, Y. et al. Enhanced photoconversion efficiency in cesium-antimony-halide 
perovskite derivatives by tuning crystallographic dimensionality. Appl. Mater. Today 
19, 100637 (2020). 
172. Saparov, B. et al. Thin-Film Preparation and Characterization of Cs3Sb2I9: A Lead-
Free Layered Perovskite Semiconductor. Chem. Mater. 27, 5622–5632 (2015). 
173. Park, B. W. et al. Bismuth Based Hybrid Perovskites A3Bi2I9 (A: Methylammonium or 
Cesium) for Solar Cell Application. Adv. Mater. 27, 6806–6813 (2015). 
174. Sun, S. et al. Synthesis, crystal structure, and properties of a perovskite-related140
bismuth phase, (NH4)3Bi2I9. APL Mater. 4, (2016). 
175. Bai, F. et al. Lead-free, air-stable ultrathin Cs3Bi2I9 perovskite nanosheets for solar 
cells. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 184, 15–21 (2018). 
176. Hoye, R. L. Z. et al. Methylammonium bismuth iodide as a lead-free, stable hybrid 
organic--inorganic solar absorber. Chem. Eur. J. 22, 2605–2610 (2016). 
177. Kim, S.-Y. Y. et al. Wide range tuning of band gap energy of A3B2X9 perovskite-like 
halides. Scr. Mater. 166, 107–111 (2019). 
178. McCall, K. M., Stoumpos, C. C., Kostina, S. S., Kanatzidis, M. G. & Wessels, B. W. 
Strong Electron-Phonon Coupling and Self-Trapped Excitons in the Defect Halide 
Perovskites A3M2I9 (A = Cs, Rb; M = Bi, Sb). Chem. Mater. 29, 4129–4145 (2017). 
179. Lehner, A. J. et al. Crystal and Electronic Structures of Complex Bismuth Iodides 
A3Bi2I9 (A = K, Rb, Cs) Related to Perovskite: Aiding the Rational Design of 
Photovoltaics. Chem. Mater. 27, 7137–7148 (2015). 
180. Singh, A. et al. Photovoltaic Performance of Vapor-Assisted Solution-Processed Layer 
Polymorph of Cs3Sb2I9. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 2566–2573 (2018). 
181. Li, F., Wang, Y., Xia, K., Hoye, R. L. Z. & Pecunia, V. Microstructural and 
photoconversion efficiency enhancement of compact films of lead-free perovskite 
derivative Rb3Sb2I9. J. Mater. Chem. A 8, 4396–4406 (2020). 
182. Umar, F. et al. Dimensionality Controlling of Cs3Sb2I9 for Efficient All-Inorganic 
Planar Thin Film Solar Cells by HCl-Assisted Solution Method. Adv. Opt. Mater. 7, 
1801368 (2019). 
183. Hodgkins, T. L. et al. Anionic order and band gap engineering in vacancy ordered 
triple perovskites. Chem. Commun. 55, 3164–3167 (2019). 
184. McCall, K. M. et al. From 0D Cs3Bi2I9 to 2D Cs3Bi2I6Cl3: Dimensional expansion 
induces a direct band gap but enhances electron--phonon coupling. Chem. Mater. 31,141
2644–2650 (2019). 
185. Yu, B. Bin et al. Alloy-induced phase transition and enhanced photovoltaic 
performance: The case of Cs3Bi2I9-xBrx perovskite solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 
8818–8825 (2019). 
186. Zheng, X. et al. Ultrasensitive and stable X-ray detection using zero-dimensional lead-
free perovskites. J. Energy Chem. (2020). 
187. Zhuang, R. et al. Highly sensitive X-ray detector made of layered perovskite-like (NH 
4) 3 Bi 2 I 9 single crystal with anisotropic response. Nat. Photonics 13, 602–608 
(2019). 
188. Li, W. G., Wang, X. D., Liao, J. F., Jiang, Y. & Kuang, D. Bin. Enhanced On–Off 
Ratio Photodetectors Based on Lead-Free Cs3Bi2I9 Single Crystal Thin Films. Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 30, 1–9 (2020). 
189. Yang, B. et al. Constructing Sensitive and Fast Lead-Free Single-Crystalline 
Perovskite Photodetectors. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 3087–3092 (2018). 
190. Ju, D. et al. Narrow band gap and high mobility of lead-free perovskite single crystal 
Sn-doped MA 3 Sb 2 I 9. J. Mater. Chem. A 6, 20753–20759 (2018). 
191. D’innocenzo, V. et al. Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide 
perovskites. Nat. Commun. 5, 1–6 (2014). 
192. Saba, M. et al. Correlated electron--hole plasma in organometal perovskites. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 1–10 (2014). 
193. De Wolf, S. et al. Organometallic halide perovskites: sharp optical absorption edge 
and its relation to photovoltaic performance. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 1035–1039 
(2014). 
194. Park, Y., Mccarthy, T. J., Sutorlk, A. C., Kanatzidis, M. G. & Gillan, E. G. Synthesis 
of Ternary Chalcogenides in Molten Polychalcogenide Salts: α-KCuQ4, KAuS5,142
NaBiS2, KFeQ2 (Q= S, Se). Inorg. Synth. Nonmolecular Solids 30, 88–95 (1995). 
195. Kang, S., Hong, Y. & Jeon, Y. A facile synthesis and characterization of sodium 
bismuth sulfide (NaBiS2) under hydrothermal condition. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 35, 
1887–1890 (2014). 
196. Zumeta-Dube, I., Ruiz-Ruiz, V.-F., Diaz, D., Rodil-Posadas, S. & Zeinert, A. TiO2 
sensitization with Bi2S3 quantum dots: the inconvenience of sodium ions in the 
deposition procedure. J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 11495–11504 (2014). 
197. Zhong, T. et al. Sodium bismuth dichalcogenides: Candidates for ferroelectric high-
mobility semiconductors for multifunctional applications. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
21, 8553–8558 (2019). 
198. Xia, Z. et al. Synthesis and characterization of NaSbS2 thin film for potential 
photodetector and photovoltaic application. Chinese Chem. Lett. 28, 881–887 (2017). 
199. Sun, W.-C., Rahayu, S. U. & Lee, M.-W. Eco-friendly NaSbS2 quantum dot-sensitized 
solar cells. IEEE J. Photovoltaics 8, 1011–1016 (2018). 
200. Rahayu, S. U. et al. Sodium antimony sulfide (NaSbS2): Turning an unexpected 
impurity into a promising, environmentally friendly novel solar absorber material. APL 
Mater. 4, (2016). 
201. Huang, P. C., Yang, W. C. & Lee, M. W. AgBiS2 semiconductor-sensitized solar cells. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 18308–18314 (2013). 
202. Pai, N. et al. Spray deposition of AgBiS2 and Cu3BiS3 thin films for photovoltaic 
applications. J. Mater. Chem. C 6, 2483–2494 (2018). 
203. Bernechea, M. et al. Solution-processed solar cells based on environmentally friendly 
AgBiS2 nanocrystals. Nat. Photonics 10, 521 (2016). 
204. Pejova, B., Grozdanov, I., Nesheva, D. & Petrova, A. Size-dependent properties of 
sonochemically synthesized three-dimensional arrays of close-packed semiconducting143
AgBiS2 quantum dots. Chem. Mater. 20, 2551–2565 (2008). 
205. Akgul, M. Z., Figueroba, A., Pradhan, S., Bi, Y. & Konstantatos, G. Low-Cost RoHS 
Compliant Solution Processed Photovoltaics Enabled by Ambient Condition Synthesis 
of AgBiS2 Nanocrystals. ACS Photonics 7–14 (2020) 
doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.9b01757. 
206. Vines, F., Bernechea, M., Konstantatos, G. & Illas, F. Matildite versus schapbachite: 
First-principles investigation of the origin of photoactivity in AgBi S 2. Phys. Rev. B 
94, 235203 (2016). 
207. Diedenhofen, S. L., Bernechea, M., Felter, K. M., Grozema, F. C. & Siebbeles, L. D. 
A. Charge Photogeneration and Transport in AgBiS2 Nanocrystal Films for 
Photovoltaics. Sol. RRL 3, 1900075 (2019). 
208. Ju, M. G., Dai, J., Ma, L., Zhou, Y. & Zeng, X. C. AgBiS2 as a low-cost and eco-
friendly all-inorganic photovoltaic material: Nanoscale morphology-property 
relationship. Nanoscale Adv. 2, 770–776 (2020). 
209. Pejova, B., Nesheva, D., Aneva, Z. & Petrova, A. Photoconductivity and relaxation 
dynamics in sonochemically synthesized assemblies of AgBiS2 quantum dots. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 115, 37–46 (2011). 
210. Wan, L. et al. Two-stage co-evaporated CuSbS2 thin films for solar cells. J. Alloys 
Compd. 680, 182–190 (2016). 
211. Chen, W.-L., Kuo, D.-H. & Tuan, T. T. A. Preparation of CuSbS 2 Thin Films by Co-
Sputtering and Solar Cell Devices with Band Gap-Adjustable n-Type InGaN as a 
Substitute of ZnO. J. Electron. Mater. 45, 688–694 (2016). 
212. Nair, M. T. S. et al. Absorber films of antimony chalcogenides via chemical deposition 
for photovoltaic application. MRS Online Proc. Libr. Arch. 836, (2004). 
213. Rastogi, A. C. & Janardhana, N. R. Properties of CuSbS2 thin films electrodeposited144
from ionic liquids as p-type absorber for photovoltaic solar cells. Thin Solid Films 565, 
285–292 (2014). 
214. Riha, S. C., Koegel, A. A., Emery, J. D., Pellin, M. J. & Martinson, A. B. F. Low-
temperature atomic layer deposition of CuSbS2 for thin-film photovoltaics. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 9, 4667–4673 (2017). 
215. Shi, L., Li, Y., Wu, C. & Dai, Y. Preparation, formation mechanism and photoelectric 
properties of well-aligned CuSbS2 nanowires. J. Alloys Compd. 648, 507–511 (2015). 
216. Su, H., Xie, Y., Wan, S., Li, B. & Qian, Y. A novel one-step solvothermal route to 
nanocrystalline CuSbS2 and Ag3SbS3. Solid State Ionics 123, 319–324 (1999). 
217. Ikeda, S. et al. Selective production of CuSbS2, Cu3SbS3, and Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles 
using a hot injection protocol. RSC Adv. 4, 40969–40972 (2014). 
218. Septina, W., Ikeda, S., Iga, Y., Harada, T. & Matsumura, M. Thin film solar cell based 
on CuSbS2 absorber fabricated from an electrochemically deposited metal stack. Thin 
Solid Films 550, 700–704 (2014). 
219. Banu, S., Ahn, S. J., Ahn, S. K., Yoon, K. & Cho, A. Fabrication and characterization 
of cost-efficient CuSbS2 thin film solar cells using hybrid inks. Sol. Energy Mater. 
Sol. Cells 151, 14–23 (2016). 
220. Colombara, D., Peter, L. M., Rogers, K. D., Painter, J. D. & Roncallo, S. Formation of 
CuSbS2 and CuSbSe2 thin films via chalcogenisation of Sb--Cu metal precursors. Thin 
Solid Films 519, 7438–7443 (2011). 
221. Yang, B. et al. CuSbS2 as a promising earth-abundant photovoltaic absorber material: 
A combined theoretical and experimental study. Chem. Mater. 26, 3135–3143 (2014). 
222. McCarthy, C. L. et al. Earth abundant CuSbS2 thin films solution processed from thiol-
-amine mixtures. J. Mater. Chem. C 4, 6230–6233 (2016). 
223. de Souza Lucas, F. W. et al. Effects of thermochemical treatment on CuSbS2145
photovoltaic absorber quality and solar cell reproducibility. J. Phys. Chem. C 120, 
18377–18385 (2016). 
224. Birkett, M. et al. Band gap temperature-dependence and exciton-like state in copper 
antimony sulphide, CuSbS2. APL Mater. 6, 84904 (2018). 
225. Soliman, L. I., EL SOAD, A. M. A. B. O., ZAYED, H. A. & El Ghfar, S. A. Structural 
and electrical properties of CuSbTe2, CuSbSe2 and CuSbS2 chalcogenide this films. 
Fiz. A 11, 139–152 (2002). 
226. Welch, A. W. et al. CuSbSe2 photovoltaic devices with 3% efficiency. Appl. Phys. 
Express 8, 1–5 (2015). 
227. Tang, D. et al. Growth and characterization of CuSbSe2 thin films prepared by 
electrodeposition. Electrochim. Acta 76, 480–486 (2012). 
228. Yang, B. et al. Hydrazine solution processed CuSbSe2: Temperature dependent phase 
and crystal orientation evolution. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 168, 112–118 (2017). 
229. Hsiang, H.-I., Yang, C.-T. & Tu, J.-H. Characterization of CuSbSe2 crystallites 
synthesized using a hot injection method. RSC Adv. 6, 99297–99305 (2016). 
230. Welch, A. W. et al. Trade-offs in thin film solar cells with layered chalcostibite 
photovoltaic absorbers. Adv. Energy Mater. 7, 1601935 (2017). 
231. Tiwari, K. J., Vinod, V., Subrahmanyam, A. & Malar, P. Growth and characterization 
of chalcostibite CuSbSe2 thin films for photovoltaic application. Appl. Surf. Sci. 418, 
216–224 (2017). 
232. Zhang, D. et al. Ternary CuSbSe 2 chalcostibite: facile synthesis, electronic-structure 
and thermoelectric performance enhancement. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 4188–4193 
(2016). 
233. Xue, D. J. et al. CuSbSe2 as a Potential Photovoltaic Absorber Material: Studies from 
Theory to Experiment. Adv. Energy Mater. 5, 1–9 (2015).146
234. Peccerillo, E. & Durose, K. Copper–antimony and copper–bismuth chalcogenides—
Research opportunities and review for solar photovoltaics. MRS Energy Sustain. 5, 1–
59 (2018). 
235. Ohno, N., Yoshida, M., Nakamura, K. & Nakai, Y. Photoluminescence of indium 
iodide. Solid State Commun. 35, 775–779 (1980). 
236. Xiao, M. et al. Symmetry-Reduction Enhanced Polarization-Sensitive Photodetection 
in Core--Shell SbI3/Sb2O3 van der Waals Heterostructure. Small 16, 1907172 (2020). 
237. Shah, K. S., Bennett, P., Moy, L. P., Misra, M. M. & Moses, W. W. Characterization 
of indium iodide detectors for scintillation studies. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. 
Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 380, 215–219 (1996). 
238. Biswas, K. & Du, M.-H. First principles study of native defects in InI. J. Appl. Phys. 
109, 113518 (2011). 
239. Brandt, R. E. et al. Investigation of bismuth triiodide (BiI3) for photovoltaic 
applications. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 4297–4302 (2015). 
240. Nason, D. & Keller, L. The growth and crystallography of bismuth tri-iodide crystals 
grown by vapor transport. J. Cryst. Growth 156, 221–226 (1995). 
241. Hamdeh, U. H. et al. Solution-processed BiI3 thin films for photovoltaic applications: 
Improved carrier collection via solvent annealing. Chem. Mater. 28, 6567–6574 
(2016). 
242. Podraza, N. J. et al. Band gap and structure of single crystal BiI3: Resolving 
discrepancies in literature. J. Appl. Phys. 114, 33110 (2013). 
243. Sellin, P. J. Thick film compound semiconductors for X-ray imaging applications. 
Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. 
Equip. 563, 1–8 (2006). 
244. Fornaro, L., Saucedo, E., Mussio, L., Gancharov, A. & Cuña, A. Bismuth tri-iodide147
polycrystalline films for digital X-ray radiography applications. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 
51, 96–100 (2004). 
245. Lintereur, A. T., Qiu, W., Nino, J. C. & Baciak, J. Characterization of bismuth tri-
iodide single crystals for wide band-gap semiconductor radiation detectors. Nucl. 
Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 
652, 166–169 (2011). 
246. Han, H. et al. Defect engineering of BiI3 single crystals: Enhanced electrical and 
radiation performance for room temperature gamma-ray detection. J. Phys. Chem. C 
118, 3244–3250 (2014). 
247. Du, M.-H. & Singh, D. J. Enhanced Born charges in III-VII, IV-VII2, and V-VII3 
compounds. Phys. Rev. B 82, 45203 (2010). 
248. K\kepińska, M., Nowak, M., Duka, P., Kotyczka-Morańska, M. & Szperlich, P. 
Optical properties of SbI3 single crystalline platelets. Opt. Mater. (Amst). 33, 1753–
1759 (2011). 
249. Virko, S. V, Motsnyi, F. V & Telbiz, G. M. Absorption diagnostics of quantum size 
effect on the excited states of SbI3 clusters in FAU zeolite. in Optical Diagnostics of 
Materials and Devices for Opto-, Micro-, and Quantum Electronics 1997 vol. 3359 
72–74 (1998). 
250. Mohan, D. B., Philip, A. & Sunandana, C. S. Iodization of antimony thin films: XRD, 
SEM and optical studies of nanostructured SbI3. Vacuum 82, 561–565 (2008). 
251. Zeng, W. et al. Synthesis of large-area atomically thin BiOI crystals with highly 
sensitive and controllable photodetection. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1900129 (2019). 
252. Dai, W.-W. & Zhao, Z.-Y. Electronic structure and optical properties of BiOI as a 
photocatalyst driven by visible light. Catalysts 6, 133 (2016). 
253. Chen, G., Li, W., Yu, Y. & Yang, Q. Fast and low-temperature synthesis of one-148
dimensional (1D) single-crystalline SbSI microrod for high performance 
photodetector. RSC Adv. 5, 21859–21864 (2015). 
254. Hoye, R. L. Z. et al. Strongly Enhanced Photovoltaic Performance and Defect Physics 
of Air-Stable Bismuth Oxyiodide (BiOI). Adv. Mater. 29, 1702176 (2017). 
255. Bhachu, D. S. et al. Bismuth oxyhalides: synthesis, structure and photoelectrochemical 
activity. Chem. Sci. 7, 4832–4841 (2016). 
256. Sfaelou, S., Raptis, D., Dracopoulos, V. & Lianos, P. BiOI solar cells. RSC Adv. 5, 
95813–95816 (2015). 
257. Jagt, R. A. et al. Controlling the preferred orientation of layered BiOI solar absorbers. 
J. Mater. Chem. C (2020). 
258. Ahmmad, B., Kurawaki, J., Ohkubo, T. & Hirose, F. TiO2/TaON-and TiO2/BiOI-
Based Solid-State Solar Cells. J. Energy Eng. 139, 338–342 (2013). 
259. Huq, T. et al. Electronic structure and optoelectronic properties of bismuth Ooxyiodide 
robust against percent-level iodine-, oxygen-and bismuth-related surface defects. 
260. Tiwari, D., Cardoso-Delgado, F., Alibhai, D., Mombrú, M. & Ferm\’\in, D. J. 
Photovoltaic Performance of Phase-Pure Orthorhombic BiSI Thin-Films. ACS Appl. 
Energy Mater. 2, 3878–3885 (2019). 
261. Hahn, N. T., Self, J. L. & Mullins, C. B. BiSI micro-rod thin films: efficient solar 
absorber electrodes? J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 1571–1576 (2012). 
262. Wang, W., Wang, S.-Y. & Liu, M. Growth of rod-like crystal BiSI films by ultrasonic 
spray pyrolysis. Mater. Res. Bull. 40, 1781–1786 (2005). 
263. Su, X. et al. A facile and clean synthesis of pure bismuth sulfide iodide crystals. Russ. 
J. Inorg. Chem. 51, 1864–1868 (2006). 
264. Zhu, L., Xie, Y., Zheng, X., Yin, X. & Tian, X. Growth of compound BiIII-VIA-VIIA 
crystals with special morphologies under mild conditions. Inorg. Chem. 41, 4560–149
4566 (2002). 
265. Raman, S. K. Morphological Aspects of Bismuth Sulpho Iodide Grown by Silica Gel 
Technique. Asian J. Chem. 11, 344 (1999). 
266. Sasaki, Y. Photoconductivity of a Ferroelectric Photoconductor BiSI. Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 4, 614 (1965). 
267. Aliev, Z. S. et al. The phase equilibria in the Bi--S--I ternary system and 
thermodynamic properties of the BiSI and Bi19S27I3 ternary compounds. J. Alloys 
Compd. 610, 522–528 (2014). 
268. Kvedaravičius, S., Audzijonis, A., Mykolaitien\.e, N. & Jcancerevičius, A. The 
electronic potential of the V-VI-VII compounds in the region of phase transition. 
Phase Transitions 58, 235–246 (1996). 
269. Wang, C. et al. Synthesis of novel SbSI nanorods by a hydrothermal method. Inorg. 
Chem. Commun. 4, 339–341 (2001). 
270. Nie, R. et al. Efficient Solar Cells Based on Light-Harvesting Antimony Sulfoiodide. 
Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1701901 (2018). 
271. Hyun, S.-C. et al. Optical properties of undoped and chromium-doped V A-VI A-VII 
A single crystals. J. Mater. Sci. 30, 6113–6117 (1995). 
272. Hamano, K., Nakamura, T., Ishibashi, Y. & Ooyane, T. Piezoelectric property of SbSl 
single crystal. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 20, 1886–1888 (1965). 
273. Butler, K. T. et al. Quasi-particle electronic band structure and alignment of the V-VI-
VII semiconductors SbSI, SbSBr, and SbSeI for solar cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 
112103 (2016). 
274. Szperlich, P., Nowak, M., Bober, Ł., Szala, J. & Stróż, D. Ferroelectric properties of 
ultrasonochemically prepared SbSI ethanogel. Ultrason. Sonochem. 16, 398–401 
(2009).150
275. Nako, K. & Balkanski, M. Electronic band structures of SbSI in the para-and 
ferroelectric phases. Phys. Rev. B 8, 5759 (1973). 
276. Steele, J. A. et al. Giant Electron–Phonon Coupling and Deep Conduction Band 
Resonance in Metal Halide Double Perovskite. ACS Nano 12, 8081–8090 (2018). 
277. Luo, J. et al. Efficient and stable emission of warm-white light from lead-free halide 
double perovskites. Nature 563, 541–545 (2018). 
278. Saitoh, A., Komatsu, T. & Karasawa, T. Exciton--phonon interaction and conversion 
of excitons from free to self-trapped states in layered metal iodide crystals under 
hydrostatic pressure. J. Lumin. 87, 633–635 (2000). 
279. Wright, A. D. et al. Electron--phonon coupling in hybrid lead halide perovskites. Nat. 
Commun. 7, 1–9 (2016). 
280. Morkoç, H. Nitride semiconductors and devices. vol. 32 (Springer Science & Business 
Media, 2013). 
281. Wolf, C., Cho, H., Kim, Y.-H. & Lee, T.-W. Polaronic Charge Carrier--Lattice 
Interactions in Lead Halide Perovskites. ChemSusChem 10, 3705–3711 (2017). 
282. Zelewski, S. J. et al. Revealing the nature of photoluminescence emission in the metal-
halide double perovskite Cs2AgBiBr6. J. Mater. Chem. C 7, 8350–8356 (2019). 
283. Smith, M. D. & Karunadasa, H. I. White-light emission from layered halide 
perovskites. Acc. Chem. Res. 51, 619–627 (2018). 
284. Zhang, L. et al. Tuning Emission and Electron--Phonon Coupling in Lead-Free Halide 
Double Perovskite Cs2AgBiCl6 under Pressure. ACS Energy Lett. 4, 2975–2982 
(2019). 
285. Li, Q. et al. Hexagonal MASnI3 exhibiting strong absorption of ultraviolet photons. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 101906 (2019). 
286. Ke, W. et al. Efficient lead-free solar cells based on hollow {en}MASnI3 perovskites.151
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 14800–14806 (2017). 
287. Takahashi, Y. Y., Hasegawa, H., Takahashi, Y. Y. & Inabe, T. Hall mobility in tin 
iodide perovskite CH3NH3SnI3: Evidence for a doped semiconductor. J. Solid State 
Chem. 205, 39–43 (2013). 
288. Peng, L. & Xie, W. Theoretical and experimental investigations on the bulk 
photovoltaic effect in lead-free perovskites MASnI3 and FASnI3. RSC Adv. 10, 14679–
14688 (2020). 
289. Ran, C. et al. Conjugated organic cations enable efficient self-healing FASnI3 solar 
cells. Joule 3, 3072–3087 (2019). 
290. Jiang, X. et al. Ultra-high open-circuit voltage of tin perovskite solar cells via an 
electron transporting layer design. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–7 (2020). 
291. Huang, L. Y. & Lambrecht, W. R. L. L. Electronic band structure, phonons, and 
exciton binding energies of halide perovskites CsSnCl3, CsSnBr3, and CsSnI3. Phys. 
Rev. B 88, 165203 (2013). 
292. Da Silva, E. L., Skelton, J. M., Parker, S. C. & Walsh, A. Phase stability and 
transformations in the halide perovskite CsSnI3. Phys. Rev. B 91, 144107 (2015). 
293. Lu, X. et al. First-principles insight into the photoelectronic properties of Ge-based 
perovskites. RSC Adv. 6, 86976–86981 (2016). 
294. Zhou, J. et al. Composition design, optical gap and stability investigations of lead-free 
halide double perovskite Cs2AgInCl6. J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 15031–15037 (2017). 
295. Filip, M. R., Hillman, S., Haghighirad, A. A., Snaith, H. J. & Giustino, F. Band Gaps 
of the Lead-Free Halide Double Perovskites Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6 from Theory 
and Experiment. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 2579–2585 (2016). 
296. Yang, X. et al. Simultaneous Power Conversion Efficiency and Stability Enhancement 
of Cs2AgBiBr6 Lead-Free Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cell through Adopting a152
Multifunctional Dye Interlayer. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2001557 (2020). 
297. Slavney, A. H. et al. Defect-Induced Band-Edge Reconstruction of a Bismuth-Halide 
Double Perovskite for Visible-Light Absorption. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 5015–5018 
(2017). 
298. Zhao, S., Yamamoto, K., Iikubo, S., Hayase, S. & Ma, T. First-principles study of 
electronic and optical properties of lead-free double perovskites Cs2NaBX6 (B= Sb, 
Bi; X= Cl, Br, I). J. Phys. Chem. Solids 117, 117–121 (2018). 
299. Volonakis, G. et al. Cs2InAgCl6: A New Lead-Free Halide Double Perovskite with 
Direct Band Gap. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 772–778 (2017). 
300. Cheng, P. et al. Combining theory and experiment in the design of a lead-free 
((CH3NH3)2AgBiI6) double perovskite. New J. Chem. 41, 9598–9601 (2017). 
301. Meyer, E., Mutukwa, D., Zingwe, N. & Taziwa, R. Lead-free halide double 
perovskites: a review of the structural, optical, and stability properties as well as their 
viability to replace lead halide perovskites. Metals (Basel). 8, 667 (2018). 
302. Jain, S. M. et al. An effective approach of vapour assisted morphological tailoring for 
reducing metal defect sites in lead-free,(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 bismuth-based perovskite solar 
cells for improved performance and long-term. Nano Energy 49, 614–624 (2018). 
303. Pazoki, M. et al. Bismuth iodide perovskite materials for solar cell applications: 
electronic structure, optical transitions, and directional charge transport. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 120, 29039–29046 (2016). 
304. Szklarz, P. et al. Lead-free hybrid ferroelectric material based on formamidine:[NH 2 
CHNH 2] 3 Bi 2 I 9. J. Mater. Chem. C 7, 3003–3014 (2019). 
305. Chonamada, T. D., Dey, A. B. & Santra, P. K. Degradation Studies of Cs3Sb2I9: A 
Lead-Free Perovskite. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 3, 47–55 (2019). 
306. Hebig, J.-C., Kühn, I., Flohre, J. & Kirchartz, T. Optoelectronic properties of153
(CH3NH3)3Sb2I9 thin films for photovoltaic applications. ACS Energy Lett. 1, 309–314 
(2016). 
307. Harikesh, P. C. et al. Rb as an Alternative Cation for Templating Inorganic Lead-Free 
Perovskites for Solution Processed Photovoltaics. Chem. Mater. 28, 7496–7504 
(2016). 
308. Johnston, A. et al. Narrow Emission from Rb3Sb2I9 Nanoparticles. Adv. Opt. Mater. 
8, 1901606 (2020). 
309. Weber, S. et al. Influence of the iodide to bromide ratio on crystallographic and 
optoelectronic properties of rubidium antimony halide perovskites. ACS Appl. Energy 
Mater. 2, 539–547 (2018). 
310. Patterson, R. J. et al. Oxygen substitution and sulfur vacancies in NaBiS2: a Pb-free 
candidate for solution processable solar cells. in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic 
Specialist Conference (PVSC) 2392–2394 (IEEE, 2017). 
doi:10.1109/pvsc.2017.8366668. 
311. Leung, W. W. W., Savory, C. N., Palgrave, R. G. & Scanlon, D. O. An experimental 
and theoretical study into NaSbS2 as an emerging solar absorber. J. Mater. Chem. C 7, 
2059–2067 (2019). 
312. Öberg, V. A., Johansson, M. B., Zhang, X. & Johansson, E. M. J. Cubic AgBiS2 
Colloidal Nanocrystals for Solar Cells. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 3, 4014–4024 (2020). 
313. Balc\i, G. K. & Ayhan, S. Ab-initio calculations of structural, optical and electronic 
properties of AgBiS2. Int. Adv. Res. Eng. J. 2, 1–8 (2018). 
314. Burgués-Ceballos, I., Wang, Y., Akgul, M. Z. & Konstantatos, G. Colloidal AgBiS2 
nanocrystals with reduced recombination yield 6.4% power conversion efficiency in 
solution-processed solar cells. Nano Energy 104961 (2020). 
315. Gassoumi, A., Alfaify, S., Nasr, T. Ben, Bouarissa, N. & others. The investigation of154
crystal structure, elastic and optoelectronic properties of CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 
compounds for photovoltaic applications. J. Alloys Compd. 725, 181–189 (2017). 
316. Bu, K. et al. Observation of High Seebeck Coefficient and Low Thermal Conductivity 
in [SrO]-Intercalated CuSbSe2 Compound. Chem. Mater. 30, 5539–5543 (2018). 
317. Temple, D. J., Kehoe, A. B., Allen, J. P., Watson, G. W. & Scanlon, D. O. Geometry, 
electronic structure, and bonding in CuMCh2 (M= Sb, Bi; Ch= S, Se): Alternative 
solar cell absorber materials? J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 7334–7340 (2012). 
318. Liu, P. et al. Electronic structures and band alignments of monolayer metal trihalide 
semiconductors MX 3. J. Mater. Chem. C 5, 9066–9071 (2017). 
319. Tiwari, D., Alibhai, D. & Fermin, D. J. Above 600 mV open-circuit voltage BiI3 solar 
cells. ACS Energy Lett. 3, 1882–1886 (2018). 
320. Trotter, J. & Zobel, T. The crystal structure of SbI3 and BiI3. Zeitschrift für Krist. 
Mater. 123, 67–72 (1966). 
321. Demartin, F., Gramaccioli, C. M. & Campostrini, I. Demicheleite-(I), BiSI, a new 
mineral from La Fossa Crater, Vulcano, Aeolian Islands, Italy. Mineral. Mag. 74, 141–
145 (2010). 
322. Nie, R. & Seok, S. Il. Efficient Antimony-Based Solar Cells by Enhanced Charge 
Transfer. Small Methods 4, 1900698 (2020). 
323. Choi, Y. C., Hwang, E. & Kim, D.-H. Controlled growth of SbSI thin films from 
amorphous Sb2S3 for low-temperature solution processed chalcohalide solar cells. 
APL Mater. 6, 121108 (2018). 
324. Grigas, J., Talik, E. & Lazauskas, V. Splitting of the XPS in ferroelectric SbSI 
crystals. Ferroelectrics 284, 147–160 (2003). 
325. Kuhar, K. et al. Sulfide perovskites for solar energy conversion applications: 
computational screening and synthesis of the selected compound LaYS 3. Energy155
Environ. Sci. 10, 2579–2593 (2017). 
326. CCVE, N. INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION. (2019). 
327. Khenkin, M. V et al. Consensus statement for stability assessment and reporting for 
perovskite photovoltaics based on ISOS procedures. Nat. Energy 5, 35–49 (2020). 
328. Zhu, Z., Chueh, C. C., Li, N., Mao, C. & Jen, A. K. Y. Realizing Efficient Lead-Free 
Formamidinium Tin Triiodide Perovskite Solar Cells via a Sequential Deposition 
Route. Adv. Mater. 30, 1–9 (2018). 
329. Ke, W. et al. Dopant-free tetrakis-triphenylamine hole transporting material for 
efficient tin-based perovskite solar cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 388–393 (2018). 
330. Shao, S. et al. Highly reproducible Sn-based hybrid perovskite solar cells with 9% 
efficiency. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1702019 (2018). 
331. Liao, Y. et al. Highly oriented low-dimensional tin halide perovskites with enhanced 
stability and photovoltaic performance. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 6693–6699 (2017). 
332. Cao, D. H. et al. Thin films and solar cells based on semiconducting two-dimensional 
ruddlesden--popper (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n-
1SnnI3n<sub>+</sub. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 982–990 (2017). 
333. Lee, S. J. et al. Fabrication of Efficient Formamidinium Tin Iodide Perovskite Solar 
Cells through SnF2-Pyrazine Complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 3974–3977 (2016). 
334. Zhang, Z. et al. High-quality (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 film-based solar cells: pushing 
efficiency up to 1.64%. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 4300–4307 (2017). 
335. Ghosh, B. et al. Limitations of Cs3Bi2I9 as lead-free photovoltaic absorber materials. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 35000–35007 (2018). 
336. Shin, S. S. et al. Solvent-engineering method to deposit compact bismuth-based thin 
films: mechanism and application to photovoltaics. Chem. Mater. 30, 336–343 (2018). 
337. Choi, Y. C., Yeom, E. J., Ahn, T. K. & Seok, S. Il. CuSbS2-sensitized inorganic--156
organic heterojunction solar cells fabricated using a metal--thiourea complex solution. 
Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 54, 4005–4009 (2015). 
338. Claybourn, M., Brinkman, A. W., Russell, G. J. & Woods, J. Electron traps in single-
crystal CdS. Philos. Mag. B 56, 385–395 (1987). 
339. Baciak, J. E., Nino, J. C., Qiu, W. & Lintereur, A. Single-Crystal Bismuth Iodide 
Gamma-Ray Spectrometers. (2012). 
340. Kulkarni, A. et al. Vapor annealing controlled crystal growth and photovoltaic 
performance of bismuth triiodide embedded in mesostructured configurations. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 9547–9554 (2018). 
341. Zhang, Y. et al. Mesoporous TiO2-based photoanode sensitized by BiOI and 
investigation of its photovoltaic behavior. Langmuir 31, 10279–10284 (2015). 
342. Hahn, N. T., Rettie, A. J. E., Beal, S. K., Fullon, R. R. & Mullins, C. B. N-BiSI thin 
films: Selenium doping and solar cell behavior. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 24878–24886 
(2012). 
343. Ganose, A. M., Matsumoto, S., Buckeridge, J. & Scanlon, D. O. Defect engineering of 
earth-abundant solar absorbers BiSI and BiSeI. Chem. Mater. 30, 3827–3835 (2018). 
344. Miller, O. D., Yablonovitch, E. & Kurtz, S. R. Strong internal and external 
luminescence as solar cells approach the Shockley--Queisser limit. IEEE J. 
Photovoltaics 2, 303–311 (2012). 
345. Lin, K. et al. Perovskite light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency 
exceeding 20 per cent. Nature 562, 245–248 (2018). 
346. Stranks, S. D., Hoye, R. L. Z., Di, D., Friend, R. H. & Deschler, F. The physics of light 
emission in halide perovskite devices. Adv. Mater. 31, 1803336 (2019). 
347. Mondal, N., De, A. & Samanta, A. Achieving near-unity photoluminescence efficiency 
for blue-violet-emitting perovskite nanocrystals. ACS Energy Lett. 4, 32–39 (2018).157
348. Wu, Y. et al. In situ passivation of PbBr64--octahedra toward blue luminescent 
CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets with near 100% absolute quantum yield. ACS Energy Lett. 3, 
2030–2037 (2018). 
349. Zhao, B. et al. High-efficiency perovskite--polymer bulk heterostructure light-emitting 
diodes. Nat. Photonics 12, 783–789 (2018). 
350. Chiba, T. et al. Anion-exchange red perovskite quantum dots with ammonium iodine 
salts for highly efficient light-emitting devices. Nat. Photonics 12, 681–687 (2018). 
351. Shamsi, J., Urban, A. S., Imran, M., De Trizio, L. & Manna, L. Metal halide 
perovskite nanocrystals: synthesis, post-synthesis modifications, and their optical 
properties. Chem. Rev. 119, 3296–3348 (2019). 
352. Hoye, R. L. Z. et al. Enhanced performance in fluorene-free organometal halide 
perovskite light-emitting diodes using tunable, low electron affinity oxide electron 
injectors. Adv. Mater. 27, 1414–1419 (2015). 
353. Adjokatse, S., Fang, H.-H. & Loi, M. A. Broadly tunable metal halide perovskites for 
solid-state light-emission applications. Mater. Today 20, 413–424 (2017). 
354. Moody, N. et al. Assessing the Regulatory Requirements of Lead-Based Perovskite 
Photovoltaics. Joule (2020). 
355. Swarnkar, A., Ravi, V. K. & Nag, A. Beyond colloidal cesium lead halide perovskite 
nanocrystals: analogous metal halides and doping. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 1089–1098 
(2017). 
356. Khalfin, S. & Bekenstein, Y. Advances in lead-free double perovskite nanocrystals, 
engineering band-gaps and enhancing stability through composition tunability. 
Nanoscale 11, 8665–8679 (2019). 
357. Ravi, V. K., Singhal, N. & Nag, A. Initiation and future prospects of colloidal metal 
halide double-perovskite nanocrystals: Cs2AgBiX6 (X= Cl, Br, I). J. Mater. Chem. A158
6, 21666–21675 (2018). 
358. Sun, J., Yang, J., Lee, J. I., Cho, J. H. & Kang, M. S. Lead-free perovskite 
nanocrystals for light-emitting devices. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 1573–1583 (2018). 
359. Ma, Z. et al. Electrically-Driven Violet Light-Emitting Devices Based on Highly 
Stable Lead-Free Perovskite Cs3Sb2Br9 Quantum Dots. ACS Energy Lett. 5, 385–394 
(2019). 
360. Zhang, J. et al. High quantum yield blue emission from lead-free inorganic antimony 
halide perovskite colloidal quantum dots. ACS Nano 11, 9294–9302 (2017). 
361. Leng, M. et al. All-inorganic bismuth-based perovskite quantum dots with bright blue 
photoluminescence and excellent stability. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1704446 (2018). 
362. Tan, Z. et al. Highly Efficient Blue-Emitting Bi-Doped Cs2SnCl6 Perovskite Variant: 
Photoluminescence Induced by Impurity Doping. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1801131 
(2018). 
363. Yang, B. et al. Lead-free direct band gap double-perovskite nanocrystals with bright 
dual-color emission. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 17001–17006 (2018). 
364. Han, P. et al. Lead-Free Sodium--Indium Double Perovskite Nanocrystals through 
Doping Silver Cations for Bright Yellow Emission. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 58, 
17231–17235 (2019). 
365. Han, P. et al. Manganese-Doped, Lead-Free Double Perovskite Nanocrystals for 
Bright Orange-Red Emission. ACS Cent. Sci. 6, 566–572 (2020). 
366. Lai, M. L. et al. Tunable near-infrared luminescence in tin halide perovskite devices. J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 2653–2658 (2016). 
367. Qiu, W. et al. Mixed Lead--Tin Halide Perovskites for Efficient and Wavelength-
Tunable Near-Infrared Light-Emitting Diodes. Adv. Mater. 31, 1806105 (2019). 
368. Lanzetta, L., Marin-Beloqui, J. M., Sanchez-Molina, I., Ding, D. & Haque, S. A. Two-159
dimensional organic tin halide perovskites with tunable visible emission and their use 
in light-emitting devices. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 1662–1668 (2017). 
369. Zhang, X. et al. Bright orange electroluminescence from lead-free two-dimensional 
perovskites. ACS Energy Lett. 4, 242–248 (2018). 
370. Wang, W., Tadé, M. O. & Shao, Z. Research progress of perovskite materials in 
photocatalysis-and photovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental 
treatment. Chem. Soc. Rev. 44, 5371–5408 (2015). 
371. Huang, H., Pradhan, B., Hofkens, J., Roeffaers, M. B. J. & Steele, J. A. Solar-Driven 
Metal Halide Perovskite Photocatalysis: Design, Stability, and Performance. ACS 
Energy Lett. 5, 1107–1123 (2020). 
372. Fujishima, A. & Honda, K. Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor 
electrode. Nature 238, 37–38 (1972). 
373. Fujishima, A. Photosensitized Electrolytic Oxidation at a TiO_2 Electrode. J. Chem. 
Soc. Japan 72, 108–113 (1969). 
374. de Krol, R. & Grätzel, M. Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production. vol. 90 
(Springer, 2012). 
375. Grätzel, M. Photoelectrochemical cells. Nature 414, 338–344 (2001). 
376. Park, S. et al. Photocatalytic hydrogen generation from hydriodic acid using 
methylammonium lead iodide in dynamic equilibrium with aqueous solution. Nat. 
Energy 2, 16185 (2017). 
377. Ahmad, S. et al. Triple-Cation-Based Perovskite Photocathodes with AZO Protective 
Layer for Hydrogen Production Applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 23198–
23206 (2019). 
378. Andrei, V. et al. Scalable triple cation mixed halide perovskite--bivo4 tandems for 
bias-free water splitting. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1801403 (2018).160
379. Andrei, V., Reuillard, B. & Reisner, E. Bias-free solar syngas production by 
integrating a molecular cobalt catalyst with perovskite--BiVO 4 tandems. Nat. Mater. 
19, 189–194 (2020). 
380. Murphy, A. B. et al. Efficiency of solar water splitting using semiconductor electrodes. 
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 31, 1999–2017 (2006). 
381. Wang, X.-D. et al. In situ construction of a Cs2SnI6 perovskite nanocrystal/SnS2 
nanosheet heterojunction with boosted interfacial charge transfer. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
141, 13434–13441 (2019). 
382. Burton, L. A. et al. Electronic and optical properties of single crystal SnS 2: an earth-
abundant disulfide photocatalyst. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 1312–1318 (2016). 
383. Ke, J. C. R. et al. Ambient-air-stable inorganic Cs2SnI6 double perovskite thin films: 
Via aerosol-assisted chemical vapour deposition. J. Mater. Chem. A 6, 11205–11214 
(2018). 
384. Bhosale, S. S. et al. Mechanism of Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction by Bismuth-Based 
Perovskite Nanocrystals at the Gas-Solid Interface. J. Am. Chem. Soc. (2019). 
385. Lu, C. et al. Synthesis of lead-free Cs 3 Sb 2 Br 9 perovskite alternative nanocrystals 
with enhanced photocatalytic CO 2 reduction activity. Nanoscale 12, 2987–2991 
(2020). 
386. Wang, T., Yue, D., Li, X. & Zhao, Y. Lead-free double perovskite Cs2AgBiBr6/RGO 
composite for efficient visible light photocatalytic H2 evolution. Appl. Catal. B 
Environ. 268, 118399 (2020). 
387. Guo, Y. et al. Stable Lead-Free (CH3NH3) 3Bi2I9 Perovskite for Photocatalytic 
Hydrogen Generation. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 15080–15085 (2019). 
388. Pan, L. et al. Boosting the performance of Cu 2 O photocathodes for unassisted solar 
water splitting devices. Nat. Catal. 1, 412–420 (2018).161
389. Zhang, Z. et al. Stable and Highly Efficient Photocatalysis with Lead-Free Double-
Perovskite of Cs2AgBiBr6. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 58, 7263–7267 (2019). 
390. Bargozideh, S. & Tasviri, M. Construction of a novel BiSI/MoS2 nanocomposite with 
enhanced visible-light driven photocatalytic performance. New J. Chem. 42, 18236–
18241 (2018). 
391. Bu, Y., Xu, J., Li, Y., Liu, Q. & Zhang, X. Enhanced photocatalytic activity of BiOI 
under visible light irradiation by the modification of MoS 2. RSC Adv. 7, 42398–42406 
(2017). 
392. Tamilselvan, M. & Bhattacharyya, A. J. Antimony sulphoiodide (SbSI), a narrow 
band-gap non-oxide ternary semiconductor with efficient photocatalytic activity. Rsc 
Adv. 6, 105980–105987 (2016). 
393. Wang, C. et al. SbSI nanocrystals: An excellent visible light photocatalyst with 
efficient generation of singlet oxygen. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6, 12166–12175 
(2018). 
394. Kong, X. Y., Lee, W. P. C., Ong, W.-J., Chai, S.-P. & Mohamed, A. R. Oxygen-
Deficient BiOBr as a Highly Stable Photocatalyst for Efficient CO2 Reduction into 
Renewable Carbon-Neutral Fuels. ChemCatChem 8, 3074–3081 (2016). 
395. Zhang, L., Wang, W., Jiang, D., Gao, E. & Sun, S. Photoreduction of CO2 on BiOCl 
nanoplates with the assistance of photoinduced oxygen vacancies. Nano Res. 8, 821–
831 (2015). 
396. Hahn, N. T., Hoang, S., Self, J. L. & Mullins, C. B. Spray pyrolysis deposition and 
photoelectrochemical properties of n-type BiOI nanoplatelet thin films. ACS Nano 6, 
7712–7722 (2012). 
397. Yakunin, S. et al. Detection of gamma photons using solution-grown single crystals of 
hybrid lead halide perovskites. Nat. Photonics 10, 585–589 (2016).162
398. Wei, H. & Huang, J. Halide lead perovskites for ionizing radiation detection. Nat. 
Commun. 10, 1066 (2019). 
399. Gao, L. & Yan, Q. Recent Advances in Lead Halide Perovskites for Radiation 
Detectors. Sol. RRL 4, 1900210 (2020). 
400. He, Y. et al. Perovskite CsPbBr3 single crystal detector for alpha-particle 
spectroscopy. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, 
Detect. Assoc. Equip. 922, 217–221 (2019). 
401. Schlesinger, T. E. et al. Cadmium zinc telluride and its use as a nuclear radiation 
detector material. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 32, 103–189 (2001). 
402. Jeong, D.-N., Yang, J.-M. & Park, N.-G. Roadmap on halide perovskite and related 
devices. Nanotechnology 31, 152001 (2020). 
403. Pan, W. et al. Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 single-crystal X-ray detectors with a low detection limit. 
Nat. Photonics 11, 726–732 (2017). 
404. Johns, P. M., Baciak, J. E. & Nino, J. C. Enhanced gamma ray sensitivity in bismuth 
triiodide sensors through volumetric defect control. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 92105 
(2016). 
405. McCall, K. M. et al. $α$-Particle detection and charge transport characteristics in the 
A3M2I9 defect perovskites (A= Cs, Rb; M= Bi, Sb). ACS Photonics 5, 3748–3762 
(2018). 
406. Birowosuto, M. D. et al. X-ray scintillation in lead halide perovskite crystals. Sci. Rep. 
6, 37254 (2016). 
407. Dmitriyev, Y. N., Bennett, P. R., Cirignano, L. J., Klugerman, M. B. & Shah, K. S. 
Bismuth iodide crystals as a detector material: Some optical and electrical properties. 
in Hard X-Ray, Gamma-Ray, and Neutron Detector Physics vol. 3768 521–529 
(1999).163
408. Saito, T., Iwasaki, T., Kurosawa, S., Yoshikawa, A. & Den, T. BiI3 single crystal for 
room-temperature gamma ray detectors. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A 
Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 806, 395–400 (2016). 
409. Sun, H. et al. Preparation and characterization of free-standing BiI3 single-crystal 
flakes for X-ray detection application. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 29, 20003–
20009 (2018). 
410. Matsumoto, M., Hitomi, K., Shoji, T. & Hiratate, Y. Bismuth tri-iodide crystal for 
nuclear radiation detectors. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 49, 2517–2520 (2002). 
411. Podraza, N. J. et al. Band gap and structure of single crystal BiI3: Resolving 
discrepancies in literature. J. Appl. Phys. 114, 33110 (2013). 
412. Guerra, M., Manso, M., Longelin, S., Pessanha, S. & Carvalho, M. L. Performance of 
three different Si X-ray detectors for portable XRF spectrometers in cultural heritage 
applications. J. Instrum. 7, C10004 (2012). 
413. Rikner, G. & Grusell, E. Effects of radiation damage on p-type silicon detectors. Phys. 
Med. Biol. 28, 1261 (1983). 
414. Häcker, R. & Hangleiter, A. Intrinsic upper limits of the carrier lifetime in silicon. J. 
Appl. Phys. 75, 7570–7572 (1994). 
415. Lutz, G. & others. Semiconductor radiation detectors. (Springer, 2007). 
416. Kasap, S. O. X-ray sensitivity of photoconductors: application to stabilized a-Se. J. 
Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 33, 2853 (2000). 
417. M. Hunter, D., Belev, G., Kasap, S. & J. Yaffe, M. Measured and calculated K-
fluorescence effects on the MTF of an amorphous-selenium based CCD x-ray detector. 
Med. Phys. 39, 608–622 (2012). 
418. Ivanov, Y. M. et al. The possibilities of using semi-insulating CdTe crystals as 
detecting material for X-ray imaging radiography. Phys. status solidi 840–844 (2003).164
419. Zhao, J. et al. Strained hybrid perovskite thin films and their impact on the intrinsic 
stability of perovskite solar cells. Sci. Adv. 3, eaao5616 (2017). 
420. Chen, Q. et al. All-inorganic perovskite nanocrystal scintillators. Nature 561, 88–93 
(2018). 
421. Cao, J. et al. Preparation of Lead-free Two-Dimensional-Layered (C8H17NH3) 
2SnBr4 Perovskite Scintillators and Their Application in X-ray Imaging. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 12, 19797–19804 (2020). 
422. Owens, A. & Peacock, A. Compound semiconductor radiation detectors. Nucl. 
Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 
531, 18–37 (2004). 
423. Yang, G. et al. Study on the properties of high purity germanium crystals. in Journal 
of Physics: Conference Series vol. 606 12013 (2015). 
424. Zhang, F. et al. Characterization of the H3D ASIC Readout System and 6.0 cm 
$^${$3$}$ $3-D Position Sensitive CdZnTe Detectors. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 59, 
236–242 (2012). 
425. Limousin, O. New trends in CdTe and CdZnTe detectors for X-and gamma-ray 
applications. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, 
Detect. Assoc. Equip. 504, 24–37 (2003). 
426. He, Y. et al. High spectral resolution of gamma-rays at room temperature by 
perovskite CsPbBr3 single crystals. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–8 (2018). 
427. Cho, H. Y., Lee, J. H., Kwon, Y. K., Moon, J. Y. & Lee, C. S. Measurement of the 
drift mobilities and the mobility-lifetime products of charge carriers in a CdZnTe 
crystal by using a transient pulse technique. J. Instrum. 6, C01025 (2011). 
428. Amman, M. S., Lee, J. S. & Luke, P. N. Alpha particle response characterization of 
CdZnTe. in Hard X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Detector Physics III vol. 4507 1–11 (2001).165
429. Wu, T., Pisula, W., Rashid, M. Y. A. & Gao, P. Application of Perovskite-Structured 
Materials in Field-Effect Transistors. Adv. Electron. Mater. 5, 1900444 (2019). 
430. Kagan, C. R., Mitzi, D. B. & Dimitrakopoulos, C. D. Organic-inorganic hybrid 
materials as semiconducting channels in thin-film field-effect transistors. Science 286, 
945–947 (1999). 
431. Zeidell, A. M. et al. Enhanced Charge Transport in Hybrid Perovskite Field-Effect 
Transistors via Microstructure Control. Adv. Electron. Mater. 4, 1800316 (2018). 
432. Wu, Y. et al. Organic--inorganic hybrid CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite materials as 
channels in thin-film field-effect transistors. RSC Adv. 6, 16243–16249 (2016). 
433. Matsushima, T. et al. Solution-Processed Organic--Inorganic Perovskite Field-Effect 
Transistors with High Hole Mobilities. Adv. Mater. 28, 10275–10281 (2016). 
434. Gao, Y. et al. Highly stable lead-free perovskite field-effect transistors incorporating 
linear $π$-conjugated organic ligands. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 15577–15585 (2019). 
435. Qian, W.-H. et al. Lead-free perovskite MASnBr3-based memristor for quaternary 
information storage. InfoMat 2, 743–751 (2020). 
436. Chua, L. Memristor-the missing circuit element. IEEE Trans. circuit theory 18, 507–
519 (1971). 
437. Strukov, D. B., Snider, G. S., Stewart, D. R. & Williams, R. S. The missing memristor 
found. Nature 453, 80–83 (2008). 
438. Han, J. S. et al. Lead-free all-inorganic cesium tin iodide perovskite for filamentary 
and interface-type resistive switching toward environment-friendly and temperature-
tolerant nonvolatile memories. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 8155–8163 (2019). 
439. Mao, J.-Y. et al. Lead-free monocrystalline perovskite resistive switching device for 
temporal information processing. Nano Energy 71, 104616 (2020). 
440. Zeng, F. et al. Opportunity of the Lead-Free All-Inorganic Cs3Cu2I5 Perovskite Film166
for Memristor and Neuromorphic Computing Applications. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 12, 23094–23101 (2020). 
441. Wang, H. et al. Memristive devices based on 2D-BiOI nanosheets and their 
applications to neuromorphic computing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 93501 (2020). 
442. Butler, K. T., Frost, J. M., Skelton, J. M., Svane, K. L. & Walsh, A. Computational 
materials design of crystalline solids. Chem. Soc. Rev. 45, 6138–6146 (2016). 
443. Kononova, O. et al. Text-mined dataset of inorganic materials synthesis recipes. Sci. 
Data 6, 1–11 (2019). 
444. Morita, K., Davies, D. W., Butler, K. T. & Walsh, A. Modelling the dielectric 
constants of crystals using machine learning. arXiv:2005.05831 [cond-mat, 
physics:physics] (2020). 
445. Momma, K. & Izumi, F. VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization of crystal, 
volumetric and morphology data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, (2011).