The nature of the observed free-electron-like state in a PTCDA monolayer on Ag(111)
Matthew S. Dyera and Mats Perssona,b
aThe Surface Science Research Centre, The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK,
bDepartment of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
A free-electron like band has recently been observed in a monolayer of PTCDA (3,4,9,10-perylene
tetracarboxylic dianhydride) molecules on Ag(111) by two-photon photoemission [Schwalb et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 146801 (2008)] and scanning tunneling spectroscopy [Temirov et al., Nature
444, 350 (2006)].
Using density functional theory calculations, we ﬁnd that the observed free-
electron like band originates from the Shockley surface state band being dramatically shifted up in
energy by the interaction with the adsorbed molecules while it acquires also a substantial admixture
with a molecular band.
PACS numbers: 68.37.Ef, 68.43.bc, 73.20.At
The electronic states at the organic molecule-metal in-
terface are of key importance for electronics and opto-
electronics applications since they inﬂuence directly the
electron transport across the interface. These interface
states are formed from the interaction between highly dis-
persive states of the metal substrate and weakly disper-
sive states of the semiconducting organic molecular lay-
ers. The molecular states at the interface shift, broaden
and become partially populated or depopulated upon in-
teraction with the metal states.
The eﬀect of the or-
ganic molecular layers on metal surface states such as
the Shockley surface (SS) states on noble metal surfaces
is less clear and has recently, attracted a lot of attention
from observations of dispersive interface states in these
systems.
In many cases upon adsorption of organic molecules
on gold and copper surfaces [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] the
SS states were observed from scanning tunneling spec-
troscopy (STS) and angle-resolved photoemission to ex-
perience small energy shifts. In some cases the fate of
the SS and the origin of highly dispersive states turned
out to be more complex. A dispersive hybrid band was
identiﬁed by STS at the interface between a monolayer
of charge-transfer complex on a gold surface and was
shown by density functional theory calculations to arise
from a mixing of metal and molecular states [7].
A
free-electron like band was identiﬁed by scanning tun-
neling spectroscopy in a monolayer of PTCDA (3,4,9,10-
perylene tetracarboxylic dianhydride) molecules on the
Ag(111) surface and was attributed to originate from
the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the
PTCDA molecule [8]. This free-electron like band was re-
cently also identiﬁed in two-photon photoemission exper-
iments by Schwalb and coworkers [9] and they challenged
the interpretation proposed by Temirov and coworkers[8].
Based on the observed short life time of electrons in this
band, Schwalb and coworkers argued that this band cor-
responded to an upward shifted SS band by the interac-
tion with the molecular monolayer. Thus there is a need
to carry out electronic structure calculations to resolve
this outstanding issue about the origin of the observed
free-electron like state.
In this letter we present density functional theory
(DFT) calculations of the electronic structure of the
PTCDA monolayer on a Ag(111) surface and show that
the origin of the observed free-electron-like state is a
Shockley surface state (SS) that has been shifted up in
energy from the interaction with the molecular mono-
layer. We also ﬁnd that the observed free-electron state
has acquired character from the LUMO+1 of the ad-
sorbed molecule.
The electronic and geometric structure of the molec-
ular monolayer on the metal surface were determined
from periodic density functional theory (DFT) calcula-
tions using the projector augmented wave method [10],
as implemented in the plane-wave based VASP code [11].
The surface unit cell of the two structurally inequiva-
lent PTCDA molecules adsorbed on a Ag(111) slab is
described in detail by Rohlﬁng and coworkers [12]. The
vacuum region is about 16.5 ˚A. The full geometry relax-
ation of the molecular monolayer and the two outermost
layers of the Ag slab was carried out using a four layer
slab with a plane wave cutoﬀof 400 eV on a 6×4×1 k-
point grid until the forces acting on the ions were smaller
in magnitude than 0.02 eV/˚A. In order to have a good
description of the Shockley surface band, a 12 layer slab
was used in the calculation of the electronic states. This
slab was obtained by adding 8 layers of Ag atoms at
their bulk positions to the bottom of the structurally op-
timized four layer slab
Following the widely used Tersoﬀ–Hamann approxima-
tion [13], the diﬀerential conductance measured in STS
experiments was approximated using the local density of
states (LDOS) calculated for the 12 layer slab at the po-
sition of the tip apex. The molecular orbital projected
density of states (MO-PDOS) was calculated by project-
ing the wave functions of the full system onto the wave
functions of the isolated monolayer kept in the same ge-
ometric structure as for the adsorbed monolayer. The
wave vector resolved LDOS and PDOS were calculated
along a line from the Γ point to the surface Brillouin zone
(SBZ).
arXiv:0912.4541v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  23 Dec 20092
Supported by the ﬁndings of Rohlﬁng and cowork-
ers [12, 14], we used the local density approximation
(LDA) for the exchange–correlation functional.
The
generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) was found to
give a too large bonding distance and a too weak bond-
ing.
A recent study by Romaner and coworkers [15]
showed that an inclusion of non-local interactions using
a recently developed van der Waals functional [16] in the
DFT calculations improved the binding energy but gave
also a too large bonding distance. In contrast the LDA
was found to give a bonding geometry in much better
agreement with standing X-ray diﬀraction data [17, 18].
The adsorption energies versus vertical distance obtained
in the LDA were shown to be in good agreement with the
results based on a more fundamental approach to weak
adsorption. In this approach the exact exchange energy
is combined with a random phase approximation for the
correlation energy as obtained from the adiabatic connec-
tion dissipation ﬂuctuation theorem [14]. Our calculated
bonding distances are in good agreement with the results
obtained by Rohlﬁng and coworkers [12].
The characters of the electronic states of the adsorbed
molecular monolayer on the Ag surface are revealed by
the calculated projected DOS on the frontier orbitals of
the isolated monolayer, shown in Fig. 1(a) at the Γ point
in the SBZ. For the isolated monolayer, the two molecules
in the surface unit cell result in two nearly degener-
ate bands for each highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO), lowest (LUMO), second lowest (LUMO+1)
and the third lowest (LUMO+2) unoccupied molecular
orbitals. The energy splittings are only about 0.1 eV at
the Γ point in the SBZ and demonstrate that the direct
interactions between the molecules are small. Note that
the LUMO+1 and LUMO+2 are nearly degenerate and
their ordering is reversed and hence their labeling com-
pared to the one obtained by Rohlﬁng and coworkers [12].
Upon adsorption, the frontier orbitals shift down in en-
ergy and are broadened by the interaction with the metal
states. The HOMOs are largely unaﬀected and shifted
down in energy with about 0.41 eV. The two LUMOs
broaden and become more or less fully occupied with
peak positions -0.32 and -0.21 eV being close to the mea-
sured peak positions of the P1 state by STS [8]. This as-
signment is in agreement with previous studies [12]. Both
the LUMO+1s and LUMO+2s broaden appreciable and
develop satellite structures but remain unoccupied. Of
particular note is the pronounced satellite peak at the
energy of about 0.5 eV in the PDOS on the LUMO+1s.
The energy of this satellite peak in the PDOS at the Γ
point is close to the onset of about 0.6 eV and 0.7eV of the
free-electron-like band (P2 state) observed in 2PPE [9]
and STS [8], respectively.
Furthermore, this peak has
a free-electron like dispersion away from the Γ point as
shown in Fig. 1(b) by the wave vector resolved PDOS on
the two LUMO+1s in the SBZ. The calculated eﬀective
mass of 0.5 me is close to the eﬀective mass of about
FIG. 1: Projected DOS (PDOS) of the adsorbed PTCDA
monolayer on the frontier molecular orbitals of the isolated
PTCDA monolayer.
In (a) PDOS on the HOMO, LUMO,
LUMO+1, and LUMO+2 are taken at the Γ point in the
SBZ. The dashed and solid lines correspond to the projected
DOS of the two nearly degenerate MOs of the two molecules
in the surface unit cell.
Their energies when aligning the
vacuum levels of the isolated and the adsorbed monolayer are
indicated by vertical arrows. The dispersion of the projected
DOS on the LUMO+1 is shown in (b) where thick the dashed
line indicate the energies of the peak positions in the PDOS.
Both LUMO+1 states are included in (b).
0.39 me and 0.47 me extracted from the observed FE
band in 2PPE [9] and STS [8], respectively. This close
agreement between observed and calculated onsets and
eﬀective masses suggests that the calculated FE band
corresponds to the observed FE band.
Note that in
this case of relatively delocalized states, the Kohn-Sham
states should provide a reasonable zero-order approxi-
mation of the one-electron addition spectrum probed by
STS. Further support for this assignment in the case of
STS comes from a comparison of calculated LDOS with
observed STS spectra and images.3
FIG. 2: Wave vector resolved LDOS of the PTCDA monolayer
adsorbed on the Ag slab (a) and the bare side of the Ag slab
(b) at distance of 7 ˚A from the top Ag layer. The magnitude
k of the parallel momentum along the direction in the surface
Brillouin zone boundary is indicated and k = 0.254
˚A−1
corresponds to the zone boundary.
The thick dashed lines
indicate the energies of the peak positions in the LDOS. The
states were broadened by 0.1 eV.
As shown in Fig. 2(a), the FE band identiﬁed in the
PDOS on the LUMO+1 shows also up in the wave vector
resolved LDOS and demonstrates that it should be ob-
servable in STS. The assignment of the observed FE band
to the calculated FE band is further corroborated by the
calculated LDOS image at the onset of the FE band cor-
responding to an energy of 0.50 eV and the Γ point in
the SBZ. This image is shown in Fig. 3(a) and is in good
agreement with the observed STS image (Inset in Fig.
3(a) of Ref. 8). At this tip apex-surface distance this im-
age shows no nodal structure and does not resemble any
MO of the PTCDA molecules. However, at a much closer
distance of about 1.3 ˚A from the molecular monolayer the
calculated LDOS image in Fig. 3(b) has a similar nodal
structure to the orbital density of the LUMO+1 state as
expected from the strong overlap of the FE state with the
LUMO+1 state in the PDOS (Fig. 1(a)). Only LUMO+1
of the isolated molecule is totally symmetric among the
frontier orbitals (see LUMO+2 in Fig. 3 of Ref. [12]) and
can interact with the FE band at the Γ point.
On the bare side of the slab, the Shockley surface state
(SS) band is clearly identiﬁed in the wave vector resolved
LDOS (Fig. 2(b)). In this calculation the onset of this SS
band is somewhat below the observed value of about -0.06
eV[19] and the calculated eﬀective mass of about 0.36 me
is close to the measured value of about 0.40 me [19].
The strong overlap of the FE band with the LUMO+1
(Figs. 2 and 3), suggests that LUMO+1 is directly in-
volved in the formation of the FE band as proposed by
Temirov and coworkers [8]. The alternative proposal by
Schwalb and coworkers [9] that the FE band originates
from the SS band of the bare surface has been investi-
gated by calculating the evolution of the FE band with
the vertical height of the molecular monolayer from the
surface. In Fig. 4, we depict the wave vector resolved
LDOS as a function of a rigid outward shift ∆z of the
molecular monolayer from its vertical equilibrium dis-
tance. The FE band shifts rapidly down in energy with
increasing ∆z.
At ∆z = 0.5 ˚A the onset has already
shifted down to about 0.1 eV above the Fermi energy and
approaches the onset of the SS. Furthermore, the disper-
sion increases somewhat with increasing ∆z and becomes
closer to the dispersion of the SS band. Thus the evo-
lution of the FE band with the height of the molecular
monolayer shows that the FE band corresponds to a SS
band shifted upwards in energy by the interaction of the
Ag surface with the adsorbed monolayer but acquire an
admixture with the LUMO+1.
FIG. 3:
Contour plots of calculated LDOS images of the
PTCDA monolayer on Ag(111) for vertical tip-molecule dis-
tances of about (a) 7.2 ˚A and (b) 1.3 ˚A at an energy 0.50 eV
above the Fermi level and at the Γ point in the SBZ. Red and
blue contours correspond to high and low LDOS, respectively.
In (b) the H, C and O atoms are represented by white, black
and red circles, respectively.
In conclusion, we have shown from a density func-4
FIG. 4:
Evolution of wave vector resolved LDOS of the
PTCDA monolayer adsorbed on the Ag slab with the height
∆z of the monolayer from its equilibrium position on the sur-
face. The magnitude k of the parallel momentum along the
direction in the surface Brillouin zone boundary is indicated
and k =0.254 ˚A−1 corresponds to the zone boundary. The
thick dashed lines indicate the energies of the peak positions
in the LDOS. The states were broadened by 0.1 eV.
tional theory study that the observed free-electron band
in scanning tunneling spectroscopy and in two photon
photoemission spectroscopy of an adsorbed monolayer of
PTCDA molecules on a Ag(111) surface originates from
the Shockley surface state being dramatically shifted up
in energy by the interaction with the adsorbed molecules.
The band acquires also a substantial admixture with the
LUMO+1 bands of the molecular monolayer. This ﬁnd-
ing shows that the metal surface states play in important
role in forming dispersive states at the metal organic in-
terface with potentially important implications for the
electron transport across the interface.
The authors would like to thank the Marie Curie Re-
search Training Network PRAIRIES, contract MRTN-
CT-2006-035810 and the Swedish Research Council (VR)
for ﬁnancial support, and the University of Liverpool
(UoL) and the Swedish National Infrastructure of Com-
puting (SNIC) for allocation of computational resources.
MSD is grateful for funding of postdoctoral fellowship by
UoL
[1] N. Nicoara, E. Romn, J. M. Gmez-Rodrguez, J. A.
Martn-Gago, and J. Mndez, Organic Electronics 7, 287
(2006).
[2] J. Ziroﬀ, P. Gold, A. Bendounan, F. Forster, and F. Rein-
ert, Surface Science 603, 354 (2009).
[3] A. Scheybal, K. Muller, R. Bertschinger, M. Wahl,
A. Bendounan, P. Aebi, and T. A. Jung, Phys. Rev. B
79, 115406 (2009).
[4] A. Tamai, A. P. Seitsonen, F. Baumberger, M. Hengs-
berger, Z.-X. Shen, T. Greber, and J. Osterwalder, Phys.
Rev. B 77, 075134 (2008).
[5] K. Kanazawa, Y. Sainoo, Y. Konishi, S. Yoshida, A. Tan-
inaka, A. Okada, M. Berthe, N. Kobayashi, O. Takeuchi,
and H. Shigekawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 740 (2007),
ISSN 0002-7863.
[6] M. S. Dyer and M. Persson, Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 20, 312002 (2008).
[7] N. Gonzalez-Lakunza,
I. Fernandez-Torrente,
K. J.
Franke, N. Lorente, A. Arnau, and J. I. Pascual, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 100, 156805 (2008).
[8] R. Temirov, S. Soubatch, A. Luican, and F. S. Tautz,
Nature 444, 350 (2006), ISSN 0028-0836.
[9] C. H. Schwalb, S. Sachs, M. Marks, A. Scholl, F. Reinert,
E. Umbach, and U. Hofer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 146801
(2008).
[10] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169
(1996).
[11] G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
[12] M. Rohlﬁng, R. Temirov, and F. S. Tautz, Phys. Rev. B
76, 115421 (2007).
[13] J. Tersoﬀand D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1998
(1983).
[14] M. Rohlﬁng and T. Bredow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
266106 (2008).
[15] L. Romaner, D. Nabok, P. Puschnig, E. Zojer, and
C. Ambrosch-Draxl, New Journal of Physics 11, 053010
(2009).
[16] M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schrder, D. C. Langreth, and
B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401 (2004).
[17] A. Hauschild, K. Karki, B. C. C. Cowie, M. Rohlﬁng,
F. S. Tautz, and M. Sokolowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
036106 (2005).
[18] A. Hauschild, K. Karki, B. C. C. Cowie, M. Rohlﬁng,
F. S. Tautz, and M. Sokolowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
209602 (2005).
[19] F. Reinert, G. Nicolay, S. Schmidt, D. Ehm, and S. Hfner,
Phys. Rev. B 63, 115415 (2001).