arXiv:2110.08234v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  8 May 2022
Terahertz Kerr eﬀect in a methylammonium lead bromide perovskite crystal
A. A. Melnikov,1, ∗V. E. Anikeeva,1, 2 O. I. Semenova,3 and S. V. Chekalin1
1Institute for Spectroscopy RAS, Fizicheskaya 5, Troitsk, Moscow, 108840 Russia
2HSE University, Myasnitskaya ul.
20, Moscow 101000, Russia
3A.V. Rzhanov Institute of Semiconductor Physics RAS, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia
We have observed short-lived optical birefringence in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal induced by a
powerful nearly single-cycle terahertz pulse. Apart from the instantaneous contribution that follows
the proﬁle of the squared pump electric ﬁeld, the recorded anisotropy signal contains an exponential
component decaying in ∼350 fs, underdamped oscillations at the frequency of ∼0.16 THz and an
intermediate picosecond relaxation process with a Gaussian tail. We associate these three non-trivial
features with, respectively, Kerr eﬀect in the inorganic lattice, terahertz-induced transient alignment
of CH3NH+
3 cations, and their coherent rotation excited by the terahertz pulse in a Raman process.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) have the chemical for-
mula ABX3 common to all perovskite compounds. Inor-
ganic atoms B = Pb and X = Cl, Br or I form a frame-
work of BX6 octahedra, while A-cations are located at
the centers of cages formed by the octahedra [1, 2]. The
key distinction of hybrid LHPs is that their A-cations are
organic molecules, such as CH3NH+
3 . In contrast to single
atom cations of fully inorganic LHPs CH3NH+
3 has rota-
tional degrees of freedom inside the cage and possesses
a permanent dipole moment. Via their dipole moments
organic cations can interact with the inorganic lattice,
with neighboring cations, and with free charge carriers
introduced e.g. via light absorption or electrical doping.
Due to coexistence of the polarizable inorganic frame-
work with the sublattice of polar rotating cations a hy-
brid LHP crystal represents a rather exotic system, which
is of great interest from the fundamental point of view.
In order to describe and interpret the resulting complex
physics, the concepts that are rather unusual for semi-
conductors are often employed by drawing analogies with
polar liquids [3–5], glasses [6, 7], and plastic crystals [8].
Interactions between the cations and the charge carri-
ers cause favorable transport properties of hybrid LHPs
that triggered their fast rise as unique materials for pho-
tovoltaics [9].
Carriers in the conduction and valence
bands are believed to be stabilized as large polarons
formed through the coupling with the ensemble of po-
lar cations [10]. Thereby their interaction with charged
defects is screened promoting moderate carrier mobil-
ity and large diﬀusion lengths in inherently defect rich
hybrid LHPs [11].
The electron-hole recombination is
rather slow in hybrid LHPs [2], which is also interpreted
as the eﬀect of cation dynamics.
A possible reason is
that the local orientational ordering of cations distorts
the inorganic lattice, which makes the bandgap indirect,
decreasing carrier recombination rate [12]. The concomi-
tant dipole ordering creates macroscopic electric ﬁelds
that induce separation of charge carriers.
∗melnikov@isan.troitsk.ru
Since rotational dynamics of organic cations is of cru-
cial importance for the physics of hybrid LHPs, it has
been studied by various theoretical and experimental
methods. Among them are calorimetry [6], neutron scat-
tering [13–15], and various types of spectroscopy (NMR
[16, 17], microwave [18], infrared [19, 20], Raman [21],
and ultrafast [5, 22]). As a result, a general picture has
emerged, according to which at low temperatures the ro-
tational motion is limited to librations around speciﬁc
directions inside the cage with occasional reorientational
jumps, while at higher temperatures in the cubic phase
it can be treated as quasi-free rotation [14]. The relative
timescales of the motion were also roughly determined al-
lowing to distinguish sub-picosecond wobbling and slower
reorientation [22]. However, the characteristic values ob-
tained for the same LHP compounds can vary by almost
two orders of magnitude. There is still no clear uniﬁed
picture of organic cation dynamics and its relation to
other fundamental processes in LHPs remains not fully
understood.
One of the ultrafast spectroscopic methods that were
used to study cation dynamics in LHPs is the observa-
tion of the transient optical Kerr eﬀect. This is a well-
established tool for the investigation of molecular orien-
tational dynamics [23, 24].
Ultrashort laser pulses are
used to exert a torque on molecules in a medium under
study via their hyperpolarizability. The result of this ac-
tion is a small average molecular alignment that reveals
itself as transient optical birefringence of the sample, pro-
vided the molecules are non-spherically symmetric. This
birefringence can be measured with a temporally delayed
probe laser pulse in the standard polarization-resolved
pump-probe experiment. The recorded decay of the Kerr
signal contains valuable information on the orientational
relaxation, since it is approximately proportional to the
correlation function of collective polarizability, while the
latter is deﬁned mainly by single-molecule and pair orien-
tational correlation functions [25]. Femtosecond optical
Kerr eﬀect in both hybrid and inorganic LHP crystals was
studied in Refs. [5, 26] where an evidence of the liquid-
like response was obtained in the form of a picosecond
non-exponential relaxation. However, in a recent publi-
cation [27] it was claimed to be an experimental artifact2
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
4
8
12
16
20
F (10
-4
)
Delay
time
(ps)
-2
0
2
4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
E
THz
 (arb. units)
Delay time (ps)
FIG. 1. Transient optical anisotropy of the sample induced
by the pump terahertz pulse. The inset shows a typical time
dependence of the electric ﬁeld strength of the pulse.
due to propagation eﬀects experienced by femtosecond
near-resonant pulses.
In the present work we study the optical Kerr eﬀect
induced in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal by a powerful
terahertz pulse and ﬁnd signatures of collective rotational
dynamics of methylammonium cations. Unlike femtosec-
ond laser pulses, single-cycle terahertz pulses act directly
on the permanent electric dipole of a polar molecule
thereby exerting a torque on the latter. As a result, both
the alignment and the orientation of the molecules occur,
though only the former is accessible if the birefringence
of the sample is probed. One more key diﬀerence is that
the characteristic timescale of variation of the electric
ﬁeld of the terahertz pulse is ∼1 ps compared to ∼1
fs for femtosecond laser pulses. In combination with the
high strength of the electric ﬁeld this leads to a relatively
high amplitude of induced molecular rotation during the
pulse. Therefore, the detected Kerr signal can be consid-
erably stronger in the case of terahertz excitation [28].
II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In our experiments we studied a 1.8 mm thick
CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal grown from solution using
the technique described in Refs. [29] and [30]. The orig-
inal method was developed for CH3NH3PbI3, and the
following modiﬁcations were made in order to adapt it
for bromide crystal growth. CH3NH3Br precursor was
synthesized by adding dropwise 28 ml of aqueous (40%)
methylamine solution to 44 ml of aqueous (48%) HBr
solution without preliminary H3PO2 stabilization. The
synthesis proceeded for 2 hours during the reaction with
continuous stirring at 0 ◦C. A precipitate of yellowish
color obtained by evaporation of the reaction mixture
at 60–70 ◦C was then washed with acetone to produce
snow-white crystals. PbBr2 was synthesized dissolving
28 g of crystalline lead acetate hydrate in 78.5 ml of an
aqueous (48%) HBr solution. At the ﬁnal stage 18.45 g
of CH3NH3Br were added to the ﬂask with the synthe-
sized PbBr2, resulting in an orange precipitate of per-
ovskite CH3NH3PbBr3.
CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals
were grown from the obtained powder in the same way
as CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals.
The crystal that was
investigated in our experiments had a polyhedral shape
somewhat similar to a rhombic dodecahedron. Therefore
we tentatively identiﬁed the studied surface as (110).
Though CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals are relatively stable
under ambient conditions, one can expect certain mod-
iﬁcation of the crystal surface and adjacent layers as a
result of regular exposure to air during long repeated
measurements. Several months after the experiments re-
ported in the present work were performed, we have re-
peated measurements with fresh samples and observed
generally similar transient signals with a certain diﬀer-
ence that was caused naturally by a variation of the pump
terahertz waveform.
In order to detect the Kerr response of the crystal we
used the standard pump-probe layout, in which a pump
terahertz pulse excites the sample, while a temporally
delayed probe pulse is used to measure the induced bire-
fringence. All experiments were performed at room tem-
perature and in ambient air. Nearly single-cycle terahertz
pulses with a duration of ∼1 ps and peak electric ﬁeld
strength of up to ∼500 kV/cm were generated using the
technique of optical rectiﬁcation of femtosecond pulses
with tilted fronts. The details of the method can be found
elsewhere [31, 32]. The direction of the pump terahertz
pulse polarization vector relative to the sample crystal
axes was arbitrary. Weak femtosecond laser pulses of ∼
50 fs duration at 800 nm were used for probing. Before
passing through the sample the probe pulse was polarized
at 45◦relative to the vertical polarization direction of the
terahertz electric ﬁeld. After the sample the polarization
of the probe pulse was rotated by ∼20◦with a half-wave
plate. Then the probe beam was transmitted through a
Wollaston prism in order to split it into vertically and
horizontally polarized beams. The latter were guided to
the ampliﬁed photodiodes, peak amplitudes of the signals
from which were proportional to the intensities of the or-
thogonally polarized components Ix and Iy. The result
of each individual measurement was a dependence of the
quantity F = (1 −Ix/Iy)pump on ÷ (1 −Ix/Iy)pump oﬀ
on the delay time between the terahertz and the probe
pulses.
If nx and ny are the refractive indices of the
sample experienced by horizontally and vertically polar-
ized probe pulses respectively, and ∆n = nx −ny, then
F ∝∆n in the limit of low ∆n. We note here that with-
out the additional rotation of polarization after the sam-
ple by the half-waveplate the detected signal would be
close to zero, since the appearance of a small ∆n induces
ellipticity of the probe beam, while the major axis of that
ellipse remains directed at 45◦to the pump electric ﬁeld.3
-1
0
1
2
3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
250
500
0.0
0.8
1.6
Signal (arb. units)
Delay
time
(ps)
Peak signal (arb. units)
E
THz
 (kV/cm)
FIG. 2.
Comparison of the initial evolution of the optical
anisotropy signal (solid line) with the squared electric ﬁeld of
the pump terahertz pulse (dashed line with ﬁlled area below
it). The inset demonstrates the dependence of the peak am-
plitude of the F(t) signal (circles) on the peak electric ﬁeld
and its parabolic ﬁt by the y = ax2 function (solid line).
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The optical anisotropy signal F(t) detected using
pump terahertz pulses with the highest available peak
electric ﬁeld strength of ∼500 kV/cm is shown in Fig.
1.
The inset illustrates time dependence of the pump
electric ﬁeld ETHz(t).
This temporal proﬁle was mea-
sured via electro-optic detection of an attenuated tera-
hertz pulse in a ZnTe crystal. The attenuation was nec-
essary, since such strong terahertz ﬁelds cannot be mea-
sured correctly by this method because of pronounced
nonlinear eﬀects in ZnTe. It was performed by a 1 mm
thick fused silica plate covered by a thin metal ﬁlm (to-
tal optical density of ∼4 in the visible range). The plate
caused a certain eﬀective lengthening of the terahertz
pulse due to high-frequency absorption and dispersion of
fused silica in the terahertz range. Though this eﬀect
was visible in the experimental data (see below), it was
rather small, so that it was possible to treat the measured
waveform as a good approximation of the real pump ter-
ahertz pulse. Weak electric ﬁeld oscillations after ∼1 ps
were caused by the absorption of the terahertz radiation
in air and were neglected, since the studied eﬀect was
quadratic in electric ﬁeld.
Speciﬁc relaxation components that comprise the F(t)
signal are relatively well separated in the time domain,
which makes them easier to disentangle. It is possible
to select three characteristic time windows. In the ﬁrst
one, roughly from −1.0 ps to 0.5 ps, the probe pulse
overlaps with the pump terahertz pulse and the induced
anisotropy is determined mainly by the electric ﬁeld of
the latter. The second window spans from ∼0.5 ps to
∼3 ps and contains a monotonically decaying compo-
nent of the signal. The third window from ∼3 ps to ∼
12 ps is occupied by weak low-frequency underdamped
oscillations. Below we extract parameters of these tem-
poral components and relate them to speciﬁc physical
processes initiated in the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal by the
pump terahertz pulse.
In Figure 2 we compare the starting part of the opti-
cal anisotropy signal F(t) with the squared electric ﬁeld
E2
THz(t). It can be seen that the positions of ﬁrst three
peaks of E2
THz(t) are slightly wider spaced than those of
F(t).
This temporal spreading was introduced by the
electric ﬁeld measurement procedure and was a result
of the attenuation of terahertz radiation, as discussed
above.
Here this eﬀect can be neglected and the cor-
responding peaks of E2
THz(t) and F(t) treated as syn-
chronous. As follows from Fig. 2, the relative amplitudes
of the peaks are very similar for both transients and F(t)
almost “follows” the E2
THz(t) waveform in the region of
the pump and probe pulse temporal overlap. Therefore,
we associate the initial part of the optical anisotropy sig-
nal from −1.0 ps to 0.5 ps with the instantaneous Kerr ef-
fect of electronic origin. It is hardly possible to ascribe it
exclusively to the inorganic lattice of the CH3NH3PbBr3
crystal or to its sublattice of organic cations since both
subsystems can in principle contribute to the Kerr signal
of this type.
We have additionally measured the dependence of the
peak F(t) value on the peak strength of the pump electric
ﬁeld. The result is presented in the inset to Fig. 2. The
obtained set of experimental points can be rather well
ﬁtted by a parabola y = ax2 conﬁrming the quadratic de-
pendence. The intermediate picosecond relaxation in the
time window from ∼0.5 ps to ∼3 ps also demonstrated
quadratic variation with the electric ﬁeld strength. How-
ever it was practically impossible in our experiments to
measure properly the ﬁeld dependence of the amplitude
of oscillations because of its very small value.
The observed similarity of the initial part of the F(t)
signal and the squared electric ﬁeld waveform E2
THz(t)
implies that in our experiment the temporal resolution
is maintained despite possible propagation eﬀects.
In-
deed, it is reasonable to expect that group refractive
indices for the pump terahertz and the 800 nm probe
pulses will diﬀer considerably. It is particularly true for
solids with a rich spectrum of dipole-active phonons, like
LHPs. This diﬀerence implies a corresponding large dif-
ference of group velocities of the pulses. As a result, in a
suﬃciently thick transparent sample the probe pulse will
“scan” the pump-induced response during propagation
through the former and despite the ﬁxed pump-probe
delay time the signal from a wide time window will be in-
tegrated. In this case the temporal resolution decreases,
while the signal becomes distorted. This eﬀect can be
approximately visualized by performing the convolution
of a well-resolved signal with a “pulse” of a rectangular
shape, the duration of which depends on the values of
the group refractive indices.
We have performed such4
calculations for the measured E2
THz(t) proﬁle and found
that for F(t) to have the observed speciﬁc shape in the
interval −1.0 ps < t < 0.5 ps, the total time lag between
the pump and the probe pulses should not exceed δτ ∼
300 fs after traveling through the sample. This time can
be estimated also as δτ ∼L(nTHz −ngr
pr)/c, where L is
the sample thickness, nTHz and ngr
pr are the refractive in-
dex at pump wavelength and the group refractive index
at probe wavelength, respectively.
While npr can be readily found in literature [33], the
available data on the optical properties of CH3NH3PbBr3
in the terahertz range are scarce. Here we rely on the
values of nTHz provided in Ref.
[34] for thin ﬁlms of
CH3NH3PbBr3.
We take nTHz = 8 at 1 THz and
ngr
pr ≈npr = 2 at 800 nm. Using the value and the for-
mula for δτ mentioned above we obtain as a rough esti-
mate that the sample thickness should be not larger than
15 µm, which is much less than the actual thickness of the
CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal (1.8 mm). The values of extinc-
tion (κTHz ≈5) and absorption (α ≈200 cm−1) coeﬃ-
cients from Ref. [34] and Ref. [35] imply that the absorp-
tion length for the radiation at 1 THz in CH3NH3PbBr3
is ∼5 µm and ∼50 µm, respectively. Therefore, we can
conclude that the observed signal originates from a suf-
ﬁciently thin layer of the crystal (on the order of ∼10
µm) and the propagation eﬀects can be neglected.
Next we proceed to the analysis of the oscillations that
dominate the F(t) signal from ∼3 ps to ∼12 ps. The
magniﬁed view of this region is shown in Fig. 3(a). We
have found that they can be well ﬁtted by the function
A1 exp(−t/τosc) sin((2π/T )t + φ), where the lifetime and
the period of the oscillations are τosc = 2.1 ± 0.3 ps and
T = 6.1 ± 0.2 ps. The latter corresponds to a frequency
of 164±5 GHz (5.5±0.2 cm−1 or 0.68±0.02 meV). Such
a low frequency can hardly be associated with the vibra-
tions of inorganic framework of CH3NH3PbBr3. Indeed,
the lowest frequency phonons of LHP crystals that are
due to collective dynamics of PbX6 octahedra (tilting, ro-
tation) or periodic translational motions of cations inside
inorganic cages (rattling modes) have energies of several
meVs and higher [13, 36–40]. Probably the lowest en-
ergy of a phonon mode in a LHP crystal reported to date
was measured for cooperative two-dimensional rotations
of PbBr6 octahedra in a fully inorganic CsPbBr3 crys-
tal (∼1 meV) [40]. However, these are zone-boundary
phonons, which cannot be accessed by optical probing.
Besides, such low-frequency modes in hybrid LHPs are
typically overdamped at room temperature and no long-
lived coherence can be generated via their impulsive ex-
citation.
It is thus natural to suppose that the observed oscilla-
tions are caused by coherent rotational dynamics of or-
ganic CH3NH+
3 cations (here by “rotational dynamics”
we mean rotation around the axis that is perpendicular
to the C-N axis). This mechanism is essentially the im-
pulsive stimulated rotational Raman scattering and im-
plies that the pump terahertz pulse creates a coherent
superposition of wave functions of rotational levels of
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-0.8
-0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
1
2
3
4
1E-5
1E-4
0.001
F (10
-4
)
(a)
F (10
-4
)
Delay
time
(ps)
(b)
Delay time (ps)
FIG. 3. (a) – Magniﬁed view of the oscillatory part of the
signal (solid line) and its ﬁt (dotted line). (b) – The residual
monotonic component of the signal. The inset shows it in the
logarithmic scale along the y-axis.
CH3NH+
3 coupled via allowed Raman transitions.
For
the simplest case of linear molecules the radiation cou-
ples rotational levels, the angular momenta of which dif-
fer by ∆J = 2, which is a necessary condition for the
observation of periodically modulated optical anisotropy
of the excited molecular ensemble. Then the frequency of
the observed oscillations of pump-induced birefringence is
ν = ∆E/h = 2B(2J +3), where J is the angular momen-
tum of the lower-lying of the two rotational states, and B
is the rotational constant in cm−1. Similar rules can be
written for rigid symmetric top molecules, but for more
complex rotors the information on exact positions of ro-
tational levels should be obtained from experiments or
theoretical calculations. Interestingly, in a recent study
of terahertz Kerr eﬀect in water coherent oscillations were
observed in the optical anisotropy response of the gaseous
phase at elevated temperatures [41]. The frequency of
those oscillations was ≈37 cm−1, which is close to the
lowest frequency line in the rotational Raman spectrum
of water vapor [42, 43].
Unfortunately, the rotational Raman spectrum of the
CH3NH+
3 molecular cation is not known. However, if we
applied the simple linear molecule model, we could pre-5
dict coherent oscillations of terahertz-induced birefrin-
gence rather similar to those observed in our experiment.
Taking B ≈0.7 cm−1 (with a reference to the somewhat
similar CH3NH2 molecule [44]) we obtain the following
possible oscillation frequencies νJ (in cm−1): 4.2, 7, 9.8,
12.6, ... for J =0, 1, 2, 3, ... . However, two factors favor
excitation of only a few lowest frequencies from this se-
ries. First, the terahertz waves at frequencies νTHz
i
and
νTHz
k
, which take part in the elementary Raman scat-
tering process, necessarily belong to the spectrum of the
pump pulse.
Therefore, since νJ = νTHz
i
−νTHz
k
, and
the amplitude of coherent rotations is proportional to
the product of amplitudes of the waves, the eﬃciency of
scattering will decrease fast for higher νJ. In addition,
this eﬀect will be further enhanced by the (νTHz
i
−νJ)4
frequency dependence of the Raman cross section.
In the framework of this model the measured frequency
of 5.5 cm−1 turns out to be very close to the mean fre-
quency of the ν0 and ν1 model Raman lines and, there-
fore the observed oscillations can be the result of beating
of these harmonics. Due to the strong damping of os-
cillations it is possible in principle to achieve a decent
reproduction of the observed oscillatory kinetics by con-
structing a linear combination of the ν0 and ν1 modes
with a certain adjustments of their phases and even with
an additional smaller contribution of the next two or
three modes. Associating the coherent rotational motion
with a limited set of impulsively excited rotational transi-
tions, the frequencies of which depend only on the inertial
properties of the CH3NH+
3 molecule, allows an assump-
tion that the decay of observed oscillations reﬂects the
population relaxation.
Then the extracted decay time
τosc = 2.1 ± 0.3 ps can be ascribed to the damping of
rotations of individual CH3NH+
3 cations caused by their
interaction with host inorganic cages.
There is of course a number of important potential cor-
rections, which can aﬀect this simpliﬁed model consider-
ably. Among them are a more precise deﬁnition of the
rotational constant, calculation of the rotational spec-
trum taking into account nonzero values of the angular
momentum around the molecule axis and possible rota-
tions of the CH3 and NH3 groups, as well as a proper
treatment of the stimulated scattering of the terahertz
pulse with a broad spectrum of frequencies in the vicin-
ity of rotational transitions. However, these reﬁnements
complicate the problem considerably and require a sepa-
rate study that is beyond the scope of the present work.
The part of the signal that remains after subtraction
of the ﬁtted oscillatory component is shown in Fig. 3(b)
starting from the delay time of 0.5 ps. This monotonic
relaxation has a clearly non-exponential character, which
is emphasized in the inset to Fig. 3(b), where this curve
is plotted in the logarithmic scale. Here it can be seen
that the initial fast sub-picosecond decay is followed by
a slower relaxation with a Gaussian-like tail.
This speciﬁc form of the Kerr eﬀect decay curve (fast
decrease with an adjacent “shoulder”) is rather common
for liquids in the case of excitation by a short femtosec-
1
2
3
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2
4
6
0
1
2
3
F (10
-4
)
Delay
time
(ps)
(a)
F (10
-4
)
Delay time (ps)
(b)
FIG. 4. (a) – The residual component of the monotonic signal
after subtracting the function that ﬁts the Gaussian-like tail
(shown in (b)).
ond laser pulse [25, 45, 46]. The non-exponential part
of the observed relaxation is often interpreted as laser-
induced overdamped coherent librations of molecules in
“cages” formed by their momentary neighbors. This pro-
cess is modeled as a superposition of sine oscillators, the
frequencies of which have a Gaussian distribution. How-
ever, characteristic periods of these librations are on the
order of several hundreds of femtoseconds.
The libra-
tions of organic cations in hybrid LHPs are believed to
have similar typical characteristic times of ∼300 fs. This
timescale is one order of magnitude shorter than the char-
acteristic duration of the Gaussian “shoulder” in the Kerr
response of CH3NH3PbBr3 observed in our experiment.
Moreover, this type of motion is likely to be irrelevant
for the room-temperature cubic phase of CH3NH3PbBr3,
when organic cation rotation is not restricted around a
speciﬁc direction inside the inorganic cage.
One more process that may appear in the ultra-
fast optical Kerr response of a molecular ensemble
as a Gaussian-like decay is the relaxation of initially
aligned molecules via inertial rotation. The characteris-
tic timescale of this process can be estimated as
p
I/kT,
where I is the moment of inertia of the molecules [47].
For CH3NH+
3 this value is ∼0.3 ps, which is also much
faster than the observed picosecond decay. Moreover, the
inertial decay of orientational correlations can be demon-
strated in pure form only by free rotors, which is not the
case of organic cations located in the inorganic cages.
For molecules in liquids the timescale of several pi-
coseconds is typical for the diﬀusive rotational motion.
This regime supersedes the inertial relaxation for hin-
dered rotors that interact with their environment and as
a result experience frequent changes of the phase of ro-
tation [48]. It should be noted that the diﬀusive decay of
orientational correlations usually has exponential charac-
ter and for liquids composed of symmetric top molecules
it is even single-exponential. For certain more complex6
systems, such as ensembles of molecules embedded in a
solid medium, the decay can be described by a stretched
exponential function or by a power law [49–51]. On the
contrary, compressed exponential relaxation and its spe-
cial case, Gaussian decay, are rather uncommon.
However, we have found that a rather good model of
the monotonic part of the observed Kerr signal can be
constructed if we assume that the transient alignment
of the CH3NH+
3 molecules created by the pump tera-
hertz pulse demonstrates Gaussian relaxation.
In this
case temporal evolution of the orientational correlation
function of the organic cations is deﬁned by the factor
e−(t/τ)2 assuming impulsive character of the terahertz
excitation. Through the anisotropic polarizability of the
molecules this behavior will be transferred to the corre-
lation function of molecular polarizability C(t) with the
corresponding contribution to the Kerr signal in the form
of −dC(t)/dt ∝te−(t/τ)2 [25]. We have found that the
latter function can serve as a rather good ﬁt of the mono-
tonic component of the detected signal starting from ∼1.5
ps, which is illustrated by Fig. 4(b). The ﬁtting proce-
dure provided the value τ = 1.65 ± 0.05 ps. The residual
shown in Fig. 4(a) represents a fast single exponential
relaxation with a characteristic time of 350±10 fs, which
can be associated with the Kerr response of the inorganic
lattice of the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal in accordance with
the interpretation proposed in Ref. [5].
Gaussian decay observed here can be an evidence
of cooperative eﬀects during orientational relaxation of
CH3NH+
3 cations. Here it is possible to draw an anal-
ogy with glassy materials, and in particular with metal
glasses, for which a compressed exponential decay of
the density correlation function was observed [52].
It
was suggested that relaxation of a local density ﬂuctua-
tion induces a long-range elastic deformation ﬁeld, which
stimulates structural relaxation at neighboring sites of
the medium. In this way an “avalanche” of relaxation
events is launched, resulting in the ensemble-averaged
decay that is faster than exponential.
In our case we
study ﬂuctuations of orientation of molecules and the
timescales are orders of magnitude shorter.
However,
CH3NH+
3 cations rotating in the inorganic cages inter-
act with each other via their permanent dipoles or via
local lattice distortions that they create upon rotation.
Thereby collective relaxational eﬀects and Gaussian de-
cay of terahertz-induced cation alignment may become
possible.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we observed the optical Kerr response
of a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal to an intense terahertz
pulse.
We decomposed the signal into several distinct
decay components and suggested an assignment of each
component to a certain relaxation process taking into ac-
count the hybrid structure of the perovskite. The initial
fast sub-picosecond decay was interpreted as the Kerr ef-
fect in the inorganic lattice of the crystal. The slower
relaxation on the timescale of several picoseconds was
ascribed to the rotational dynamics of organic CH3NH+
3
cations. It comprises a Gaussian-like decay and weak un-
derdamped low frequency oscillations. The former can be
associated with diﬀusive relaxation of cation alignment
created by the pump electric ﬁeld, while the fact that
it follows the compressed exponential law can be a sig-
nature of collective glass-like dynamics. Oscillations are
due to coherent rotations of individual cations induced
in the process of impulsive stimulated rotational Raman
scattering of the terahertz pulse. The characteristic re-
laxation times determined in the framework of the sug-
gested interpretation can be used to model interactions
of organic cations with inorganic lattice and with each
other. Observation of the strong-ﬁeld terahertz Kerr ef-
fect in CH3NH3PbBr3 and other hybrid lead halide per-
ovskites at lower temperatures is also of great interest,
since it implies studies of nonlinear dynamics of organic
cations, the motion of which is initially restricted along
certain directions inside inorganic cages. Since the ap-
plied method allows visualization of rotational dynamics
in real time, it can be eﬀectively combined with dynamic
or quasistatic stimuli like excitation of electrons, applica-
tion of external ﬁelds or heating in order to study inter-
action of organic cations with charge carriers and their
dynamics at phase transitions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The reported study was partially supported by the
Academic Fund Program at the HSE University (grant
number 21-04-016).
[1] T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei,
S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzeld and T. J. White, Syn-
thesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite
CH3NH3PbI3 for solid-state sensitised solar cell appli-
cations, J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 5628 (2013).
[2] T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D.
Cahen, Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites:
low-cost
semiconductors with intriguing charge-transport proper-
ties, Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 15007 (2016).
[3] N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo, H. Suga, Dielectric
study of CH3NH3PbX3, (X = Cl, Br, I), J. Phys. Chem.
Solids 53, 935-939 (1992).
[4] J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, What Is Moving in Hybrid
Halide Perovskite Solar Cells?, Acc. Chem. Res. 49,
528–535 (2016).
[5] H. Zhu, K. Miyata, Y. Fu, J. Wang, P. P. Joshi, D. Nies-
ner, K. W. Williams, S. Jin, X.-Y. Zhu, Screening in
crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid7
perovskites, Science 353, 1409 (2016).
[6] D. H. Fabini, T. Hogan, H. A. Evans, C. C. Stoumpos,
M. G. Kanatzidis, and Ram Seshadri, Dielectric and
thermodynamic signatures of low-temperature glassy dy-
namics in the hybrid perovskites CH3NH3PbI3 and
HC(NH2)2PbI3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 376–381 (2016).
[7] M. Simenas, S. Balciunas, J. N. Wilson, S. Svirskas,
M. Kinka, A. Garbaras, V. Kalendra, A. Gagor, D.
Szewczyk, A. Sieradzki, M. Maczka, V. Samulionis, A.
Walsh, R. Grigalaitis, and J. Banys, Suppression of phase
transitions and glass phase signatures in mixed cation
halide perovskites, Nat. Commun. 11, 5103 (2020).
[8] J. Even, M. Carignano, and C. Katan, Molecular disorder
and translation/rotation coupling in the plastic crystal
phase of hybrid perovskites, Nanoscale 8, 6222, (2016).
[9] A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, and T. Miyasaka, Halide per-
ovskite photovoltaics:
background, status, and future
prospects, Chem. Rev. 119 3036–3103 (2019).
[10] X.-Y. Zhu, and V. Podzorov, Charge Carriers in Hy-
brid Organic–Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskites Might
Be Protected as Large Polarons, . Phys. Chem. Lett. 6,
4758–4761 (2015).
[11] S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou,
M. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza, and
H. J. Snaith, Electron-hole diﬀusion lengths exceeding
1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite ab-
sorber, Science 342, 341 (2013).
[12] C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi,
and S. Sanvito, Revealing the role of organic cations in
hybrid halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nat. Commun.
6, 7026 (2015).
[13] I. P. Swainson, C. Stock, S. F. Parker, L. Van Eijck, M.
Russina, and J. W. Taylor, From soft harmonic phonons
to fast relaxational dynamics in CH3NH3PbBr3, Phys.
Rev. B 92, 100303(R) (2015).
[14] A. M. A. Leguy, J. M. Frost, A. P. McMahon, V. G. Sakai,
W. Kochelmann, C. Law, X. Li, F. Foglia, A. Walsh, B.
C. O’Regan, J. Nelson, J. T. Cabral, P. R. F. Barnes,
The dynamics of methylammonium ions in hybrid or-
ganic–inorganic perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun. 6,
7124 (2015).
[15] B. Li, Y. Kawakita, Y. Liu, M. Wang, M. Matsuura,
K. Shibata, S. Ohira-Kawamura, T. Yamada, S. Lin, K.
Nakajima, S. F. Liu, Polar rotor scattering as atomic-
level origin of low mobility and thermal conductivity of
perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nat. Commun. 8, 16086 (2017).
[16] R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop, J. B. Macdonald, Cation
rotation in methylammonium lead halides, Solid State
Commun. 56, 581-582 (1985).
[17] W.-C. Qiao, J. Wu, R. Zhang, W. Ou-Yang, X. Chen,
G. Yang, Q. Chen, X. L. Wang, H. F. Wang, Y.-F. Yao,
In situ NMR investigation of the photoresponse of per-
ovskite crystal, Matter 3, 2042 (2020).
[18] A. Poglitsch
and
D.
Weber,
Dynamic
disorder
in
methylammoniumtrihalogenoplumbates (II) observed by
millimeter-wave spectroscopy, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 6373
(1987).
[19] N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo, H. Suga, Calorimet-
ric and IR spectroscopic studies of phase transitions in
methylammonium trihalogenoplumbates (II), J. Phys.
Chem. Solids 51, 1383-1395 (1990).
[20] K. N. Boldyrev, V. E. Anikeeva, O. I. Semenova, and
M. N. Popova, Infrared Spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 Hy-
brid Perovskite:
Signatures of Phase Transitions and
of Organic Cation Dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. C 124,
23307–23316, (2020).
[21] Y. Guo, O. Yaﬀe, D. W. Paley, A. N. Beecher, T. D.
Hull, G. Szpak, J. S. Owen, L. E. Brus, and M. A.
Pimenta, Interplay between organic cations and inor-
ganic framework and incommensurability in hybrid lead-
halide perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3, Phys. Rev. Materials
1, 042401(R) (2017).
[22] A. A. Bakulin, O. Selig, H. J. Bakker, Y. L. A. Rezus,
C. Muller, T. Glaser, R. Lovrincic, Z. Sun, Z. Chen, A.
Walsh, J. M. Frost, and T. L. C. Jansen, Real-time ob-
servation of organic cation reorientation in methylam-
monium lead iodide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6,
3663-3669 (2015).
[23] R. Righini, Ultrafast Optical Kerr Eﬀect in Liquids and
Solids, Science 262, 1386-1390 (1993).
[24] D. McMorrow, W. T. Lotshaw and G. A. Kenney-
Wallace, Femtosecond optical Kerr studies on the ori-
gin of the nonlinear responses in simple liquids, IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. 24, 443-454, (1988).
[25] B. Kohler and K. A. Nelson, Femtosecond impulsive
stimulated light scattering from liquid carbon at high
pressure: experiment and computer simulation, J. Phys.
Chem. 96, 6532 (1992).
[26] K. Miyata, D. Meggiolaro, M. Tuan Trinh, P. P. Joshi,
E. Mosconi, S. C. Jones, F. De Angelis, X.-Y. Zhu, Large
polarons in lead halide perovskites, Sci. Adv. 3, e1701217
(2017).
[27] S. F. Maehrlein, P. P. Joshia, L. Huber, F. Wang, M.
Cherasse, Y. Liu, D. M. Juraschek, E. Mosconi, D. Meg-
giolaro, F. De Angelis, and X.-Y. Zhu, Decoding ultrafast
polarization responses in lead halide perovskites by the
two-dimensional optical Kerr eﬀect, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 118, e2022268118 (2021).
[28] M. Sajadi, M. Wolf, and T. Kampfrath, Transient bire-
fringence of liquids induced by terahertz electric-ﬁeld
torque on permanent molecular dipoles, Nat. Commun.
8, 14963 (2017).
[29] O. I. Semenova, E. S. Yudanova, N. A. Yeryukov, Y. A.
Zhivodkov, T. S. Shamirzaev, E. A. Maximovskiy, S. A.
Gromilov, I. B. Troitskaia, Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 crys-
tals and ﬁlms. Synthesis and characterization, J. Cryst.
Growth 462, 45-49 (2017).
[30] E. S. Yudanova, T. A. Duda, O. E. Tereshchenko, O.
I. Semenova, Properties of methylammonium lead iodide
perovskite single crystals, J. Struct. Chem. 58 1567-1572
(2017).
[31] A. G. Stepanov, J. Hebling, and J. Kuhl, Eﬃcient gen-
eration of subpicosecond terahertz radiation by phase-
matched optical rectiﬁcation using ultrashort laser pulses
with tilted pulse fronts, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3000
(2003).
[32] A. A. Melnikov, K. N. Boldyrev, Yu. G. Selivanov, V. P.
Martovitskii, S. V. Chekalin, and E. A. Ryabov, Coherent
phonons in a Bi2Se3 ﬁlm generated by an intense single-
cycle THz pulse, Phys. Rev. B 97, 214304 (2018).
[33] M. S. Alias, I. Dursun, M. I. Saidaminov, E. M. Diallo,
P. Mishra, T. K. Ng, O. M. Bakr, and B. S. Ooi, Optical
constants of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite thin ﬁlms mea-
sured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, Opt. Express 24,
16586 (2016).
[34] A. V. Andrianov, A. N. Aleshin, A. O. Zakhar’in and
L. B. Matyushkin, Terahertz Optical Characteristics of
Organometallic Lead-Iodide (Bromide) Perovskites and8
Cesium Lead Halide Nanocrystals,
2018 43rd Interna-
tional Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz
Waves (IRMMW-THz), pp. 1-2 (2018).
[35] I. Maeng, S. Lee, H. Tanaka, J.-H. Yun, S. Wang, M.
Nakamura, Y.-K. Kwon, and M.-C. Jung, Unique phonon
modes of a CH3NH3PbBr3 hybrid perovskite ﬁlm with-
out the inﬂuence of defect structures: an attempt toward
a novel THz-based application, NPG Asia Mater. 12, 53
(2020).
[36] A. C. Ferreira, S. Paofai, A. L´etoublon, J. Ollivier, S.
Raymond, B. Hehlen, B. Ruﬄ´e, S. Cordier, C. Katan,
J. Even, and P. Bourges, Direct evidence of weakly dis-
persed and strongly anharmonic optical phonons in hy-
brid perovskites, Commun. Phys. 3, 48 (2020).
[37] D. Zhao, J. M. Skelton, H. Hu, C. La-o-vorakiat, J.-
X. Zhu, R. A. Marcus, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle, Y. M.
Lam, A. Walsh, and E. E. M. Chia, Low-frequency op-
tical phonon modes and carrier mobility in the halide
perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 using terahertz time-domain
spectroscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 201903 (2017).
[38] S. Ponc´e, M. Schlipf, and F. Giustino, Origin of Low Car-
rier Mobilities in Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett.
4, 456 (2019).
[39] F. Song, C. Qian, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, K. Peng, S. Wu,
X. Xie, J. Yang, S. Sun, Y. Yu, J. Dang, S. Xiao, L. Yang,
K. Jin, H. Zhong, X. Xu, Hot Polarons with Trapped Ex-
citons and Octahedra-Twist Phonons in CH3NH3PbBr3
Hybrid Perovskite Nanowires, Laser Photonics Rev. 14,
1900267 (2020).
[40] T. Lanigan-Atkins, X. He, M. J. Krogstad, D. M. Pa-
jerowski, D. L. Abernathy, Guangyong N. M. N. Xu, Zhi-
jun Xu, D.-Y. Chung, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. Rosenkranz,
R. Osborn,
and O. Delaire,
Two-dimensional over-
damped ﬂuctuations of the soft perovskite lattice in
CsPbBr3, Nat. Mater. 20, 977 (2021).
[41] H. Elgabarty, T. Kampfrath, D. J. Bonthuis, V. Balos,
N. K. Kaliannan, P. Loche, R. R. Netz, M. Wolf, T. D.
K¨uhne, M. Sajadi, Energy transfer within the hydrogen
bonding network of water following resonant terahertz
excitation. Sci. Adv. 6, eaay7074 (2020).
[42] E. Nordstr¨om, A. Bohlin, and P.-E. Bengtsson, Pure ro-
tational Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy of wa-
ter vapor and its relevance for combustion diagnostics, J.
Raman Spectrosc. 44, 1322–1325 (2013).
[43] G. Avila, G. Tejeda, J. M. Fernandez, and S. Montero,
The rotational Raman spectra and cross sections of H2O,
D2O, and HDO, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 220, 259–275 (2003).
[44] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure
III. Electronic Spectra and Electronic Structure of Poly-
atomic Molecules, Van Nostrand, New York (1966).
[45] E. L. Quitevis and M. Neelakandan, Femtosecond optical
Kerr eﬀect studies of liquid methyl iodide, J. Phys. Chem.
100, 10005 (1996).
[46] Y. J. Chang and Edward W. Castner, Jr., Intermolec-
ular dynamics of substituted benzene and cyclohexane
liquids, studied by femtosecond nonlinear-optical polar-
ization spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 3330 (1996).
[47] W. A. Steele, Molecular reorientation in liquids. II. An-
gular autocorrelation functions, J. Chem. Phys. 38, 2411
(1963).
[48] M. Tim, T. A. Jackson, P. A. Anﬁnrud in Ultrafast In-
frared and Raman Spectroscopy, edited by M. D. Fayer
(Marcel Dekker, New York, 2001).
[49] J.-M. Zanotti, M.-C. Bellissent-Funel, and S.-H. Chen,
Relaxational dynamics of supercooled water in porous
glass, Phys. Rev. E 59, 3084 (1999).
[50] D. Laage and W. H. Thompson, Reorientation dynamics
of nanoconﬁned water: Power-law decay, hydrogen-bond
jumps, and test of a two-state model, J. Chem. Phys.
136, 044513 (2012).
[51] S. R.-V. Castrillon, N. Giovambattista, I. A. Aksay, and
P. G. Debenedetti, Eﬀect of surface polarity on the struc-
ture and dynamics of water in nanoscale conﬁnement, J.
Phys. Chem. B 113, 1438–1446 (2009).
[52] K.
Trachenko
and
A.
Zaccone,
Slow
stretched-
exponential and fast compressed-exponential relaxation
from local event dynamics, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
33, 315101 (2021).