arXiv:1211.0486v4  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  28 Mar 2013
A uniﬁed model of droplet epitaxy for compound semiconductor nanostructures:
experiments and theory
Kristofer Reyes and Peter Smereka
Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan
Denis Nothern and Joanna Mirecki Millunchick
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
Sergio Bietti, Claudio Somaschini, and Stefano Sanguinetti
L-NESS, Dipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali, Universita di Milano Bicocca
Cesare Frigeri
IMEM-CNR, Parma
We present a uniﬁed model of compound semiconductor growth based on kinetic Monte Carlo
simulations in tandem with experimental results that can describe and predict the mechanisms
for the formation of various types of nanostructures observed during droplet epitaxy. The crucial
features of the model include the explicit and independent representation of atoms with diﬀerent
species and the ability to treat solid and liquid phases independently. Using this model, we examine
nanostructural evolution in droplet epitaxy. The model faithfully captures several of the experimen-
tally observed structures, including compact islands and nanorings. Moreover, simulations show
the presence of Ga/GaAs core-shell structures that we validate experimentally. A fully analytical
model of droplet epitaxy that explains the relationship between growth conditions and the resulting
nanostructures is presented, yielding key insight into the mechanisms of droplet epitaxy.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology involves the manipulation of matter
at the nanoscale in order to take advantage of the phys-
ical properties of materials which arise by a ﬁne tuning
of shape and size. Due to quantum conﬁnement eﬀects,
three dimensional semiconductor nanostructures can be-
have as artiﬁcial atoms and, like natural atoms, show a
discrete spectrum of energy levels1. In contrast to actual
atoms, the electronic properties of quantum nanostruc-
tures can be ﬁnely tuned by adjusting structural parame-
ters such as size, composition and morphology. The latter
parameter is the most relevant for the control of quantum
nanostructure electronic properties, as tiny variations in
morphology or composition can cause dramatic changes
on the band structure2.
One of the most common methods for the fabri-
cation of quantum nanostructures is the growth of
lattice-mismatched III-V semiconductor materials via the
Stranski-Krastanov (SK) mode.
SK growth exploits
the self-assembly of pyramidal-like quantum dots (QDs),
driven by the relaxation of lattice mismatched strain ac-
cumulated in the epilayer. Despite the high success of
the technique, which led to fundamental physical under-
standing and a variety of applications, the available de-
sign degrees of freedom remain limited. The precise en-
gineering of size and shape of QDs via SK self-assembly
remains problematic, thus limiting the possibilities for
the design of arbitrary electronic and optical properties.
To overcome the SK growth limitations, a fully kinetic
limited growth procedure called droplet epitaxy (DE)
was introduced3,4.
Unlike SK self-assembly, DE does
not rely on strain for the formation of three dimensional
nanostructures. Instead, DE is based on the sequential
deposition of III and V column elements at controlled
temperatures and ﬂuxes and, as such, is a bottom-up
fabrication and patterning technique. An initial depo-
sition of metallic group III such as Ga in a group V
free environment leads to the formation of nanometer
size liquid droplets. Subsequent exposure of the liquid
droplets to the group V vapor causes them to crystallize
into quantum dots, by which we mean compact, three-
dimensional nanostructure5,6.
A variety of nanostruc-
tures may be obtained using this technique, ranging from
compact quantum dots, quantum rings, and core shell
structures6–11.
While experimental observations evoke
likely mechanisms, a uniﬁed model for the formation
of various nanostructural morphologies via DE is still
needed. Understanding the precise mechanisms behind
their formation is critical to controlling the various prop-
erties such as shape, size, and composition, which in turn
aﬀect the macroscopic behavior of devices based on such
quantum nanostructures.
Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulation is a useful tool
for developing and testing models of epitaxial growth and
have shed light on the important processes for a wide
range of scenarios. Previous KMC simulations of GaAs
systems modeled homoepitaxial growth on a cubic lat-
tice. Among the earliest simulations, a single component
was used to model epitaxial growth, varying energy pa-
rameters to account for the expected eﬀect on diﬀusivity
by diﬀerent Ga/As deposition ratios12. Two-component
simulations have also been performed13–15 to study as-
pects of ﬁlm growth such as the transition from two di-2
mensional island formation to step-ﬂow growth.
Such
simulations, however, are necessarily over small areas and
are valid only for a limited range growth parameters. In
most cases these simulations are unable to model growth
regimes in which the group V to group III ratio in the
growing ﬁlm is not unity, as in the case in droplet epitaxy.
The simulations presented in this paper are designed
to capture a wide range of phenomenology in epitaxial
growth, with an emphasis on the growth from the liquid
phase. We chose to examine droplet epitaxy ﬁrst, but
the simulation and analytical methodologies presented
here are applicable to other growth mechanisms, specif-
ically nanowire grown by the Vapor-Liquid-Solid (VLS)
method. In both VLS and DE growth, a liquid metal re-
acts with vapor, resulting in crystallization at the liquid-
solid interface. In DE, the metal is consumed during this
crystallization process. In VLS, the metal is either not
consumed or consumed more slowly than in DE, result-
ing in structures of length scale larger than the original
liquid droplet.
In this paper, we present experimental and simulation
results that shed light on the exact mechanisms behind
the formation of nanostructures in droplet epitaxy. We
introduce a KMC model (Section II) that is capable of
simulating the formation of nanostructures at all stages,
from homoepitaxial growth, to liquid metal droplet for-
mation and subsequent crystallization. The model rep-
resents Ga and As atoms explicitly, and treats liquid and
solid phases independently. Although atomistic, the sim-
ulations form large-scale global structure consistent with
experimental results in a reasonable amount of time. As
an initial validation of the model, GaAs homoepitaxy
simulations are compared with analogous experiments,
accurately reproducing a surface termination phase dia-
gram (Section III). We then turn our attention to the
main thrust of the paper, the nanostructural depen-
dence on growth conditions during droplet epitaxy. We
present experimental results exhibiting this dependence,
along with corresponding simulations (Section IV). The
model can capture the broad range of nanostructures ob-
served in the experiments with the correct qualitative de-
pendence on growth parameters. Moreover, simulations
predict the presence of Ga/GaAs core-shell structures,
which are diﬃcult to observe unambiguously in experi-
ments. The existence of both monocrystalline and poly-
crystalline shells suggest two independent mechanisms of
their formation: a morphological instability of the crys-
tallization front or nucleation at the vapor-liquid inter-
face.
We show by simulation that nucleation-induced
shell structures may be recrystallized into fully crystal-
lized GaAs islands by annealing in high temperature
(Section IV B 1).
In the case of the instability-driven
shell formation, we provide simulation and experimen-
tal evidence to suggest the presence of a Mullins-Sekerka
instability (Section IV B 2). Lastly, we develop a fully an-
alytical model (Section V) that describes the existence of
the structures observed and their dependence on growth
conditions. The theoretical model agrees well with sim-
ulation and experimental results.
II.
KINETIC MONTE CARLO MODEL
Prior work in simulating GaAs systems focused on ho-
moepitaxial growth and studied associated phenomena
such as step density12 and growth modes of GaAs ﬁlms13.
In these simulations, surface diﬀusion of adatoms played
the central role, and because of the stoichiometric na-
ture of epitaxial growth, a simple cubic lattice and the
solid-on-solid constraint suﬃced in modeling key aspects
of this process. Droplet epitaxy however, poses several
issues that cannot be captured by earlier models. During
DE, the system is inherently non-stoichiometric in that
the relative concentrations of Ga and As atoms on the
surface are diﬀerent from one another and so care must
be taken to model liquid droplet formation. Processes
other than surface diﬀusion, such as events within liquid
and at the liquid-solid interface, play a key role and can-
not be captured by a simple solid-on-solid model. Lastly,
DE results in large-scale nanostructures on the order of
10s to 100s of nm so that the simulations must be per-
formed eﬃciently within large domains.
We simulate the homoepitaxial growth and droplet epi-
taxy experiments with a KMC model that attempts to
address the relevant processes in DE. In the model, atoms
occupy positions on a 1+1 dimensional analog of the zinc
blende lattice illustrated in Figure 1. Each position on
the lattice is adjacent to four nearest neighbors and four
next-nearest neighbors. Lattice sites are vacant or occu-
pied by either a Ga or As atom. The 1+1 dimensional ap-
proach naturally hinders our model to catch eﬀects that
are associated to the three-dimensional crystal structure
and to atomic rearrangements driven by non-local ener-
getics like surface reconstruction phase changes. Specif-
ically surface reconstruction dynamics leads to changes
in adatom surface mobility, both in terms of diﬀusion
length and diﬀusivity anisotropy, and in adatom incorpo-
ration into the crystal structure. These eﬀects are at the
origin, in DE, of the observed dependence on substrate
temperature and preparation procedure in the droplet
formation critical coverage during the initial Ga deposi-
tion and of the shape and anisotropy of control of the
quantum nanostructures that are possible thanks to ﬁne
control of surface reconstruction dynamics16,17. The sim-
plicity of the model implies such eﬀects cannot be cap-
tured, in line with previous work on KMC modeling. We
note here that other theoretical models can capture sur-
face reconstructions18. The processes that are captured
and studied in this paper, however, yield ﬁrst-order in-
sight to the growth mechanisms in DE.
In each Monte Carlo step, one of four local events al-
ters at most two positions on the lattice.
Atoms may
desorb from the surface (A in Figure 1), diﬀuse on the
surface (B), exchange with neighboring atoms (C), or
adsorb onto a vacant position on the surface (D). The
model does not enforce a solid-on-solid constraint. In-3
stead, atom conﬁgurations are required to be connected,
i.e. there must exist a chain of atoms (through nearest
neighbor bonds) between any two atoms in the conﬁgu-
ration. While connectedness is inherently a global prop-
erty, the requirement is approximated by enforcing the
property on all local neighborhoods. Any event resulting
in a disconnected conﬁguration is disallowed.
FIG. 1: (Color online) KMC Events. Simulations are
run on a 1+1 analog of GaAs zinc blende structure. Ga
atoms are colored red, As atoms are green. The model
allows for atom desorption (A), surface diﬀusion (B),
atom-atom exchanges (C), and atom deposition (D).
The simulations are explicitly multi-species and
atomistic, and evolve via events on individual Ga or As
atoms.
Event rates are determined by simple nearest and
next-nearest neighbor bond-counting. Due to the multi-
species nature of the model, several bonding energies
must be speciﬁed. Speciﬁcally, nearest and next-nearest
neighbors are bonded by energies that depend solely
on the species of the two connected atoms.
Nearest
neighbor bonding energies are given by three parameters
γ(Ga, Ga), γ(Ga, As) and γ(As, As). Next-nearest neigh-
bor bonds are only assigned between atoms of the same
species and are denoted γnn(Ga, Ga) and γnn(As, As).
In this way, Ga and As only interact through nearest-
neighbor bonds, whereas Ga-Ga and As-As interact
through nearest and next-nearest neighbor bonds. The
parameter values used in the simulations are summa-
rized in Table I. These energy values imply that the Ga-
As bonds are energetically preferred, while weak As-As
bonds eﬀectively eliminate excess As by desorption. The
bonding energies were calibrated from the homoepitaxy
(Section III) and liquid droplet simulations (Section IV)
to match qualitative experimental assumptions and ob-
servations. Within the homoepitaxy simulations, the Ga-
As bond strengths were tuned in order to observe a tran-
sition from rough island formation in the low temperature
regime to a smooth step-ﬂow growth mechanism in high
temperatures19. In the case of liquid droplet simulations,
we tune the Ga-Ga bond strength to match liquid droplet
statistics such as droplet width and number density.
Monte Carlo transition rates r(X, Y ) from atom con-
ﬁguration X to conﬁguration Y are taken to be of an
γ(eV) Ga As
Ga
0.3 0.5
As
0.5 0.1
γnn(eV) Ga As
Ga
0.3
-
As
-
0.1
TABLE I: (Color online) Pairwise nearest and
next-nearest neighbor bonding energies used throughout
the paper.
Arrhenius form:
r(X, Y ) = R0e−Ea(X,Y )/kBT ,
where R0 = 1013s−1 is a constant rate prefactor, T is
temperature, and Ea(X, Y ) is the activation energy for a
particular event.
For surface diﬀusion, Ea is simply the sum of the bond-
ing energies about the diﬀusing atom. For the desorption
of an As atom, the activation energy is the sum of the
bonding energies about the desorbing atom and an ad-
ditional desorption barrier µAs = 1.1 eV, its value cal-
ibrated by homoepitaxial simulations described in Sec-
tion III. The desorption of Ga is disallowed. In the case
of atom-atom exchanges, which occur within a liquid
droplet, we use a base energy barrier ǫD for the As diﬀu-
sion barrier in liquid Ga, described in more detail below.
To facilitate exchanges occurring at the liquid-solid in-
terface, for which we must take solid bonds into account,
we deﬁne an intermediate state in which the exchanging
atoms are replaced by an intermediate species H. Bond-
ing energies between Ga or As atoms and H atoms are
obtained by averaging over H = Ga and H = As, e.g.
γ(Ga, H) = 1
2 (γ(Ga, Ga) + γ(Ga, As)) .
The activation energy Ea of an atom-atom exchange at
the liquid-solid interface is then taken to be the sum of
the base barrier ǫD and the change in bonding energies
between the original and the intermediate states.
For example, we consider the attachment and detach-
ment of an As atom onto the liquid-solid interface, as
illustrated in Figure 2. We denote the states before and
after the detachment as X, Y , respectively, and the inter-
mediate state as deﬁned above by I(X, Y ). The change
in energy E(X) −E(I(X, Y )) between states X and
I(X, Y ), describing the additional barrier for attachment
can be computed from a small number of relevant bonds,
indicated by black lines in the ﬁgure. The total activation
energy for attachment EA = ǫD + E(X) −E(I(X, Y )) is
then given by
EA = ǫD + 4γ(Ga, As) + 4γ(Ga, Ga) + 2γnn(Ga, Ga)
−8γ(Ga, H) −5γnn(Ga, H) −γnn(As, H),
= ǫD −1
2γnn(Ga, Ga) −1
2γnn(As, As),
= 0.5 eV.
We may calculate the activation energy for detachment4
ED = ǫD + E(Y ) −E(I(X, Y )) in a similar manner:
ED = ǫD + 4γ(Ga, As) + 4γ(Ga, Ga)
+3γnn(Ga, Ga) + γnn(As, As)
−8γ(Ga, H) −5γnn(Ga, H) −γnn(As, H),
= ǫD + 1
2γnn(Ga, Ga) + 1
2γnn(As, As),
= 0.9 eV.
The forms of the attachment and detachment barriers EA
and ED indicate what physically occurs during the transi-
tions, namely the formation/removal of one next-nearest
neighbor Ga-Ga bond and one next-nearest neighbor As-
As bond.
X
I(X,Y)
Y
Attachment
Detachment
FIG. 2: (Color online) Attachment and detachment
events at the liquid-solid interface. This ﬁgure
illustrates the attachment and detachment of an As
atom in liquid Ga onto and from a perfectly ﬂat
liquid-solid interface, along with the intermediate state
for the transitions. The intermediate species H is
colored blue. The black lines indicate the relevant
bonds that contribute to the change in energy between
the initial and intermediate state.
A.
Liquid Barriers
Because we wish to simulate liquid droplet epitaxy,
our model identiﬁes liquid neighborhoods in which events
are assigned diﬀerent energy barriers to account for the
salient physics within a liquid droplet. The diﬀusion of
As through a liquid droplet occurs atomistically as an
exchange event between the diﬀusing As atom and a Ga
atom neighbor. Such an atom-atom exchange event is
deemed a liquid event if there is at most one As atom
total within the neighborhood of the exchanging atoms.
Further, such exchanges in the liquid are categorized
as occurring on either the surface or bulk of a droplet.
A surface liquid exchange event is one in where there
is at least one vacancy within the neighborhoods of the
exchanging atoms. These events represent the incorpora-
tion of an As atom from the surface into the bulk of the
droplet or vice versa and are given a constant activation
energy barrier ǫI = 1.05 eV. The particular value of ǫI is
slightly larger than the 1 eV barrier for the diﬀusion of
an As adatom on the surface of a liquid droplet. A liquid
event that does not occur on the surface is categorized
as a liquid bulk event and is assigned the energy barrier
ǫD, which represents the diﬀusion barrier of an As atom
within the bulk of the liquid. The value ǫD = 0.7 eV was
calibrated by the droplet epitaxy simulations described
in Section IV. Only after this model was completed did
we become aware of the experimental work of Gorokhov
et al.20 who reported the energy barrier for diﬀusion As
in Ga of approximately 0.7 eV.
Because of its ability to handle the liquid phase in-
dependently, along with its multi-component nature,
the model may be minimally adapted to simulate other
growth modes in which liquid droplets are used. In par-
ticular, the model has been applied to simulate nanowire
growth by the VLS method21. Here, identifying liquid
neighborhoods is important to prescribe special energy
barriers for the conversion of vapor phase to a solid one,
mimicking the catalytic eﬀect of the liquid droplet. Addi-
tionally, without the SOS constraint, the model captures
phenomena such as nanowire bending.
B.
Detailed Balance
In order to discuss detailed balance, we consider the
behavior of our model in the absence of deposition and
desorption22. Under such conditions, we assume the in-
corporation of an As atom from the surface of a droplet
into the liquid bulk to be a rare event.
The rates of
the remaining events (i.e.
surface diﬀusion and atom-
atom exchanges both within the liquid and at the liquid-
solid interface) satisfy detailed balance with respect to
the Boltzmann distribution
π(X) = 1
Z exp

−E(X)
kBT

,
where E(X) is the energy of the state obtained by bond
counting, using bonding energies in Table I. For these
events X →Y , the activation energies are of the form
Ea = E(X) −E(I(X, Y )) + ǫ(X, Y ),
(1)
where I(X, Y ) is a transition state between X and Y
and ǫ(X, Y ) is an additional barrier. Detailed balance
follows since we have required that I(X, Y ) and ǫ(X, Y )
be symmetric with respect to their arguments.
For surface diﬀusion, I(X, Y ) is the state with the dif-
fusing atom removed and ǫ(X, Y ) = 0. Because the re-
verse event Y →X is also a surface diﬀusion event, it fol-
lows that I(X, Y ) = I(Y, X) and ǫ(X, Y ) = 0 = ǫ(Y, X).
For atom-atom exchanges, I(X, Y ) is the state where the
exchanging atoms are replaced with intermediate species
H, and hence I(X, Y ) = I(Y, X), and ǫ(X, Y ) = ǫD.
Note that it was claimed above that for an As atom dif-
fusing through liquid Ga, an activation barrier ǫD was
used without any further contribution to the barrier from
bond counting. This is consistent with the generalized5
description of the activation energy in equation (1), be-
cause in this case E(X) = E(I(X, Y )) = E(Y ), i.e. no
bonds are formed/removed during the diﬀusion of As in
liquid Ga.
C.
Implementation
Because of the time and length scales associated to
the nanostructures we wish to simulate, an eﬃcient im-
plementation of the KMC algorithm is important.
A
rejection-free sampling of rates is achieved by the stan-
dard binary-tree data structure containing partial sums
of the rates23, achieving O(log N) sampling by binary
search and O(log N) tree updates, where N is the num-
ber of atoms. As the algorithm proceeds, event rates for
several atoms must be recomputed at every step. A rate
caching technique is employed to remove repeated rate
calculations by taking advantage of the recurrent nature
of local neighborhoods within KMC21. This procedure
leads to signiﬁcant performance gains.
III.
HOMOEPITAXY
As an initial application and validation of the simula-
tions, we model GaAs substrate growth at various growth
conditions. It is known that the surface reconstruction
of a GaAs substrate depends on both the temperature
and the relative deposition rates of Ga and As24.
In
1+1 dimensions, simulations cannot reproduce surface
reconstructions. Instead, we measured surface termina-
tion and its dependence on temperature and incoming
deposition rates. The simulation results were then com-
pared to experimental data.
Experiments on GaAs(001) were carried out using
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) equipped with a solid
source for Ga and a valved source for As4. Substrates
were initially heated under As4 overpressure to desorb
the native oxide layer. A 75 nm GaAs buﬀer layer was
then grown at a substrate temperature of 590 ◦C with a
Ga deposition rate of 0.4 monolayers per second (ML/s)
and an As4 growth rate of at least 2 ML/s, as measured
by reﬂection high energy electron diﬀraction (RHEED)
oscillations25. After growing the GaAs buﬀer, the sub-
strate temperature was ﬁxed between 460 ◦C and 610 ◦C.
GaAs was then grown with a Ga rate of 0.6 ML/s while
the As rate was slowly reduced from 3.9 ML/s to 1.0
ML/s. During the growth, the RHEED pattern was mon-
itored for the change from an As-terminated reconstruc-
tion to a Ga-terminated reconstruction. Consistent with
the expected result, at high substrate temperatures the
As rate required to maintain an As-terminated surface
increases with temperature. At lower temperatures, the
necessary As rate becomes invariant with temperature.
To simulate GaAs substrate growth, both Ga and
As were deposited simultaneously on initially ﬂat, As-
terminated substrate. The Ga deposition rate FGa was
ﬁxed at 0.37 ML/s, while the As deposition rate FAs
was varied so that the deposition ratio FAs/FGa ranged
between .5 and 10. Rates (reported in ML/s) here and
throughout this paper describe the rate at which atoms
are added to the system. The observed stoichiometric
growth of the ﬁlm is an emergent property of the model
rather than explicitly enforced through deposition rates.
This is manifest in the stoichiometry observed over a
broad range of deposition ratios.
The temperature was varied between 427 ◦C and
727 ◦C. Five monolayers of total material was deposited,
and surface Ga concentration was measured at regular
intervals during the deposition of the last two monolay-
ers. Figure 3 is a surface termination phase diagram as a
function of deposition rate and temperature for both ex-
perimental and simulation results. Red squares indicate
the conditions where simulations show a predominantly
Ga-terminated surface, while green circles are conditions
yielding a predominantly As-terminated surface. Exper-
imentally determined transition from the As-terminated
2 × 4 to the Ga-terminated 4 × 2 reconstructions as de-
termined by RHEED are shown as blue diamonds and
indicate a good agreement between simulation and ex-
perimental data.
The relevant parameter that controls surface termina-
tion is the As desorption barrier µAs. Varying this pa-
rameter eﬀectively shifts the above phase diagram hori-
zontally. The value µAs = 1.1 eV is ﬁtted to experiments.
This value, combined with the energy values in Table I
yield a total activation energy of
2γ(Ga, As) + γnn(As, As) + µAs = 2.2 eV,
for the desorption of an As adatom from a Ga ter-
minated substrate, comparing favorably to experimen-
tal results26,27. Moreover, the speciﬁc parameter value
does not signiﬁcantly impact the qualitative shape of the
phase diagram. That is, independent of µAs, the simu-
lations capture a constant critical deposition ratio in the
low temperature regime and its transition to an increas-
ing critical ratio as temperature increases.
Due to the simplicity of the model, individual As atoms
are deposited on the surface rather than As4 molecules.
In this homoepitaxy study, the adsorption/desorption
processes, and in particular, the value of µAs was tuned
to match the macroscopic properties surface termination
and concentration. As such, the ﬁtted value of µAs serves
as an accurate measure of As growth and incorporation
onto the substrate. Other surface As kinetic eﬀects, in-
cluding those determined by surface reconstruction dy-
namics on the local scale, may not be captured by the
model. However, in the DE growth procedure, these ef-
fects appear to be relevant mostly in determining the
extended nanostructure shape control peculiar to DE16
or in the extremely low temperature and high As ﬂuxes.
We therefore believe that such eﬀects should lead to mi-
nor modiﬁcations in the description of the DE processes
that are studied in this paper.
An analytical expression for the boundary between6
Ga-terminated and As-terminated substrates can be de-
termined.
During homoepitaxial growth, several pro-
cesses occur, including surface diﬀusion and As desorp-
tion, but to ﬁrst order we may approximate the system
in a quasi-static deposition/ desorption-limited regime.
In this regime, the transition between the As and Ga-
terminated surface occurs when the amount of Ga on the
impinging upon the surface (given by FGa) is equal to the
net rate of As growth (given by FAs −Rdesorb), where
Rdesorb is the desorption rate of As, taken as the har-
monic average of the desorption rates for an As adatom
on a Ga-terminated surface (with desorption energy bar-
rier 2.2 eV) and a As atom on a Ga-terminated surface
with one nearest or next nearest neighbor (with desorp-
tion barrier 2.3 eV). This boundary is given by the equa-
tion
FAs
FGa
= 1 + Rdesorb
FGa
,
(2)
and agrees well with both simulation and experiments.
1/727
1/654
1/575
1/509
1/452
10
0
10
1
1/T (°C−1)
FAs/FGa
 
 
As−Terminated (Simulated)
Ga−Terminated (Simulated)
Eqn. 2
Experimental
FIG. 3: (Color online) Substrate termination phase
diagram as a function of deposition ratio and
temperature, obtained from simulations and
experiments. Those growth conditions resulting in a
mostly Ga-terminated substrate are in indicated by red
squares, while green circles label As-terminated ones.
The blue points above indicate the conditions where the
transition from Ga to As termination occurred
experimentally. The blue curve indicates the boundary
between Ga and As-terminated given by equation 2.
IV.
LIQUID DROPLET EPITAXY
The main thrust of this work was to accurately capture
the processes relevant to liquid droplet formation and
crystallization. The experiment and simulations proceed
in two main steps, which are at the basis of the droplet
fabrication of GaAs/AlGaAs quantum nanostructures6.
First, Ga is deposited onto the substrate by MBE, form-
ing liquid Ga droplets.
Next the droplets are crystal-
lized by the introduction of an As ﬂux. Depending on
growth conditions such as temperature and As overpres-
sure, the actual morphology upon crystallization can
vary6.
The observed nanostructures may range from
fully crystallized compact quantum dots, to nanorings
and even etched holes7,8,16,28,29.
A.
Quantum Dots and Nanorings
1.
Experimental methodology
In order to experimentally assess the exact dependence
of droplet epitaxy nanostructures on the growth condi-
tion, we prepared a matrix of samples, sampling the typi-
cal droplet epitaxy ranges for substrate temperatures and
As4 beam equivalent pressure (BEP). The samples were
prepared following the standard procedure for droplet
epitaxy6,30,31.
After the oxide removal and the GaAs
buﬀer layer growth (1 µm on thick at 580 ◦C) to ensure
the atomic smoothness of the surface, a 200 nm thick
Al0.3Ga0.7As barrier layer is grown at the same temper-
ature of 580 ◦C. The presence of an AlGaAs barrier per-
mits the use of the fabricated structures, once capped
with another AlGaAs layer, as morphology controlled
quantum nanostructures. We do not expect the Al con-
tent of the barrier to inﬂuence the obtained GaAs nanos-
tructure morphology as the AlGaAs barrier is buried un-
der a 1.75 ML GaAs top layer which forms on the surface
during the following Ga deposition step6,32.
Prior to the deposition of Ga, the As cell is closed and
the background pressure reduced below 10−9 Torr. Ga
droplets are then formed on the substrate surface by sup-
plying 2.5 ML of Ga at 350 ◦C with a deposition rate of
0.08 ML/s. Many nearly hemispherical Ga droplets form
at a density of 8 × 108 cm−2. The average droplet di-
ameter and height are 50 nm and 20 nm, respectively.
The same Ga droplet preparation procedure is used for
each sample in order to assure the same droplet density
before the crystallization procedure. We then explored
the nanostructure fabrication parameter space by varying
the substrate temperature and the As4 BEP used for the
crystallization of Ga droplets. Nine diﬀerent samples are
prepared by systematically varying the temperature be-
tween 150 and 350 ◦C and the As4 BEP between 5×10−7
and 5 × 10−5 Torr. The crystallization time is kept con-
stant (10 min.) to ensure the complete reaction of the
Ga contained in the droplets with As atoms. The mor-
phological dependence of the fabricated nanostructures,
measured by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) on tem-
perature and As overpressure is summarized in Figure 4.
From this data, it is clear that compact islands form at
low temperature, and as the As overpressure is reduced or
the temperature is increased, the nanostructures become
rings. At the highest temperature and lowest As over-7
pressure, only holes remain in the place of the droplet.
From large area scans (not shown here) the number of
GaAs nanostructures per unit area are in excellent agree-
ment with the original droplets density. Each droplet was
thus transformed into a GaAs nanostructure at the end
of the crystallization procedure.
2.
Simulations
The simulations were performed in a similar manner
to the experiments outlined above.
However, in order
to simplify the analysis, the temperature was maintained
constant throughout each simulation.
This is justiﬁed
by the observation that the Ga deposition temperature
aﬀects droplet density but does not play a relevant role
in determining droplet crystallization dynamics. Simula-
tions proceed as follows:
1. Ga atoms are deposited on a ﬂat, As-terminated
GaAs substrate at a rate of 0.1 ML/s at tempera-
ture T until 4.0 monolayers are deposited;
2. The system is then annealed for 60 seconds in the
absence of deposition;
3. After annealing, an As ﬂux is introduced by the
deposition of As at a rate of FAs ML/s until the
system attains equilibrium.
The growth parameters T and FAs were varied in or-
der to study their eﬀect on the resulting morphology. The
temperature T ranged between 150 ◦C and 350 ◦C, while
the As deposition rate FAs ranged between 0.1 ML/s and
4 ML/s Within this range of growth parameters, we are
able to simulate the formation of a variety of nanostruc-
tures similar to those observed experimentally.
During the ﬁrst phase of the simulation, Ga atoms
are deposited on a ﬂat, initially As-terminated GaAs
substrate. The ﬁrst monolayer of Ga deposited is con-
sumed in creating a layer of Ga, resulting in a Ga ter-
minated substrate. Afterwards, the remaining Ga atoms
diﬀuse along the surface and eventually nucleate hemi-
spherical droplets as the system attempts to minimize
the vapor-liquid interface.
During droplet formation,
simulations show that liquid Ga etches into GaAs, and
the amount of etching is regulated by temperature, as
illustrated in Figure 5.
Higher temperatures result in
more signiﬁcant etching.
This is in agreement with
experimental observations28,33.
As the droplet etches
into the substrate liquid Ga atoms displace substrate As
atoms, which subsequently attach near the triple junc-
tion. In addition, some of the displaced substrate ma-
terial is wicked out of the droplet in a step-ﬂow growth
mode. The relevant model parameter controlling the ef-
fect of etching is the additional barrier for atom-atom
exchanges, ǫD. The value ǫD = 0.7 eV was selected to ﬁt
qualitative experimental observations on the amount of
etching occurring at various temperatures.
Once the liquid droplet has formed and come to equi-
librium, an As ﬂux is introduced to initiate crystalliza-
tion.
Arsenic atoms deposited near or on the droplet
diﬀuse through the liquid quickly20 and attach most typi-
cally near the triple-junction. Such crystallization results
in a growing GaAs front and the droplet is crystallized
inward. If no nucleation occurs at the vapor-liquid in-
terface and the GaAs fronts coalesce, a fully crystallized
quantum dot forms in place of the liquid droplet. Such is
the case for moderate temperatures and deposition rate.
Figure 6 is a sequence of simulation snapshots illus-
trating the crystallization of a liquid droplet resulting
in a quantum dot (left panel), along with analogous
AFM images of the GaAs fronts obtained experimen-
tally (right panel). The simulation images in the ﬁgure
illustrate a typical quantum dot grown at T = 275◦C
and FAs = 0.06 ML/s.
The general trend is that a
Ga drop forms once enough Ga has been deposited on
the surface (Figure 6A), followed by crystallization near
the vapor/liquid/solid triple junction upon exposure to
As ﬂux (B,C). As crystallization progresses, the liquid
Ga is consumed, resulting in a fully crystallized quan-
tum dot (D). Experimental images (Figure 6, right panel)
were obtained from individual samples prepared accord-
ing to the experimental procedure outlined above, vary-
ing As exposure time. The unreacted liquid Ga was re-
moved from the samples before imaging by selective wet
etching8, thus showing GaAs fronts at various stages dur-
ing crystallization. The AFM images conﬁrm the growth
mechanism observed in the simulations during crystal-
lization.
Besides compact quantum dots, other nanostructures
are predicted by the simulation by considering a broad
range of temperatures and As ﬂuxes.
For example, if
FAs is suﬃciently low or T is suﬃciently large, the simu-
lations show the formation of nanorings upon crystalliza-
tion. The exact morphology of the nanorings is sensitive
to the growth conditions. Figure 7 shows the morpholog-
ical dependence of the rings on FAs, ﬁxing T = 375◦C.
At low As deposition rate (FAs = 0.1 ML/s), broad and
short nanorings form. As FAs is increased the nanorings
become more compact and taller so that at FAs = 0.4
ML/s the resulting structure resembles a “pitted” quan-
tum dot. This compares well to the experimental results
in Figure 4, e.g. the transition in structure between Fig-
ure 4c and Figure 4f as As4 BEP is lowered.
Figure
4c resembles the pitted quantum dot structure of Figure
7c. If the BEP is lowered, the resulting nanostructure
in Figure 4f is a broad and shallow disk surrounding a
pit, resembling Figure 7a. Similar structures and their
dependence on both As deposition rate and temperature
have been reported in the literature10,34.
B.
Core-Shell Structures
In addition to quantum dots and nanorings, simula-
tions show the existence of Ga/GaAs core-shell struc-8
FIG. 4: (Color online) Droplet epitaxy experimental results showing typical nanostructures observed over a range of
substrate temperatures and As4 BEP.
tures. These structures consist of liquid Gallium being
completely surrounded by GaAs.
In the low tempera-
ture/high deposition rate regime, the GaAs shells are
polycrystalline. However, in a higher temperature/lower
ﬂux regime, the simulations show the formation of a shell
in registry with substrate. It will be shown below that the
ﬁrst case is the result of nucleation of GaAs at the vapor-
liquid interface whereas the second case results from a
Mullins-Sekerka instability of the crystallization growth
front.
1.
Nucleation
In the low temperature and high As deposition rate
regime nucleation of GaAs clusters near the vapor-liquid
is signiﬁcant. This results in the formation of a polycrys-
talline GaAs shell surrounding a liquid Ga core, as illus-
trated in Figure 8. In the ﬁgure, a liquid droplet grown
at T = 150◦C is crystallized by an As ﬂux, deposited at
a rate of 0.8 ML/s. Nucleation at the vapor-liquid in-
terface occurs within seconds upon crystallization (Fig-
ure 8B). The liquid core in the ﬁnal conﬁguration (C) is
completely surrounded by a GaAs shell after 2.4 seconds,
preventing any further crystallization of the liquid.
The presence of polycrystalline GaAs, with a high
number of grain boundaries and stacking faults that this
implies, prevents the possibility that such islands could
act as eﬃcient emitters and hence are undesirable. An-
nealing at higher temperature may remove such defects
because grain boundaries and stacking faults provide fast
diﬀusion paths for the liquid Ga trapped within the shell.
Such paths are accessible at higher temperatures. More-
over, thermal ﬂuctuations of the nuclei can eﬀectively
serve to dissolve the shell, which are characteristically
thin in this regime. Therefore such conﬁgurations may
be annealed at a high temperature to remove defects.
Indeed, the simulations bear this out. Figure 9 shows a
quantum dot with polycrystalline shell resulting from the
crystallization of a liquid droplet at an As deposition rate
of FAs = 0.80 ML/s and temperature T = 150◦C . The
dot is then annealed at a higher temperature T = 350◦C.
The initial conﬁguration (9A) shows the droplet prior to
recrystallization. Temperature is then increased, main-
taining the same As ﬂux. Ga atoms move along grain
boundaries toward the surface, resulting in a broadening
of the dot. The thin shell dissolves, resulting in liquid Ga
exposed to As (B, C). Within two seconds, the droplet
becomes fully crystallized (D) into a shallow GaAs island,
absent of any defects.
These simulations show that liquid cores arising due to
nucleation at the vapor-liquid interface, which would be9
A
T = 200°C
B
T = 300°C
C
T = 350°C
10 nm
FIG. 5: (Color online) Liquid droplets grown at
T = 200, 300, 350 ◦C and FGa = 0.1 ML/s. Here and
throughout the paper, Ga and As atoms initially
belonging to the substrate are colored red and green,
respectively. Ga and As atoms deposited throughout
the simulation are colored purple and blue, respectively.
detrimental to optical and electronic properties of quan-
tum dots, can be eliminated by annealing. This expands
the parameter space available for the formation of quan-
tum dots formed via droplet epitaxy, allowing the fabri-
cation of optical quality dots even at low temperatures.
Even if not strictly related to the presence of a liquid
core, but rather to a low quality of the crystalline na-
ture of the fabricated nanostructures, post-crystallization
in-situ annealing temperatures have been experimentally
demonstrated to strongly increase the optical quality of
droplet epitaxy GaAs/AlGaAs dots, reducing individ-
ual dot emission lines35, allowing single photon emission
upto liquid nitrogen temperatures36 and increasing the
dot emission decay time.
2.
Mullins Sekerka Instability
As described above, simulations show that crystalliza-
tion performed at low temperature and high As ﬂux
result in nucleation of polycrystalline GaAs shells sur-
rounding a liquid Ga core, resulting from nucleation of
GaAs at the vapor-liquid interface.
In the high tem-
perature regime, such surface nucleation does not occur.
However, for crystallization at suﬃciently high ﬂuxes and
high temperature, simulations show the existence of liq-
uid Ga core structures surrounded by GaAs shells in reg-
istry with the substrate. As a consequence, such shells
are monocrystalline and result from a mechanism sepa-
rate from surface nucleation.
By examining the formation of such structures in the
simulations, we propose that these shells are driven by
an instability at the liquid-solid growth front. Simulation
snapshots in Figure 10 illustrate the growth mechanism
behind this. When this phenomenon occurs no surface
nucleation is observed; instead, the growth of the GaAs
front undergoes an instability at the liquid-solid interface
characterized by unstable undulations of the solid growth
front.
Such instabilities grow along the droplet-vapor
surface until they have completely surrounded the liquid
Ga subsequently preventing further crystallization.
This behavior suggests the presence of a Mullins-
Sekerka (MS) instability during crystallization, which im-
plies that only perturbations of suﬃciently large wave-
length experience unstable growth. Therefore, droplets
must be suﬃciently large to accommodate perturbations
of appropriate wavelength in order for the instability to
manifest. The eﬀect of temperature, As ﬂux and droplet
radius have on the presence of the MS instability is given
in Section V. but the droplet size dependence may be
utilized in order to conﬁrm the existence of liquid cores
by MS instability experimentally.
It is important to note that simulations suggest that,
unlike those formed by surface nucleation, the core-shell
structure formed due to the MS instability cannot readily
be annealed and recrystallized into an epitaxial nanodot.
In this case, shell is in registry with respect to the sub-
strate. Therefore, there are no defects along which liquid
Ga can move so that they may crystallize upon exposure
to the As vapor. Crystallization of such liquid cores may
still occur, however, if the shell is thin enough to dissolve
upon annealing thus exposing the liquid Ga to the As
ﬂux, however instability-induced shells are characteristi-
cally thicker than those resulting from surface nucleation
according to simulations.
Experimental Validation. In order to experimentally
validate the presence of the MS instability predicted by
simulations, nano-islands were formed via droplet epi-
taxy by depositing Ga droplets of extremely diﬀerent
sizes (60 and 250 nm diameter) and crystallizing them
at high As BEP at 150 ◦C.
Simulations predict a size
driven transition from a uniform crystallization for small
droplet radii to a Ga rich core at higher droplet sizes.
We used Si as the growth substrate. This is dictated by
the need of diﬀerentiation of the nano-island constituents
(Ga and As) from that of the substrate (Si)16, thus al-
lowing the use of standard EDS
STEM techniques for
the characterization of the As and Ga distribution within
the islands. The samples were prepared as follows. Be-
fore the introduction into the MBE system, Si(001) sub-
strates were cleaned by standard RCA treatment and ﬁ-
nally dipped into HF solution to get the H-termination
of the surface, conﬁrmed by the (1 × 1) pattern observed
with RHEED. Subsequently, the substrate temperature
was set at 780 ◦C and the hydrogen desorption was car-10
t = 65.5 secs
D
10 nm
t = 45.5 secs
C
t = 32.5 secs
B
t = 6.5 secs
A
FIG. 6: (Color online) Left panel: model snapshots of liquid droplet crystallization at various times for T = 275◦C
and FAs = 0.06 ML/s resulting in a compact quantum dot. Ga and As atoms from the original substrate are colored
red and green, respectively. Ga atoms deposited to form liquid droplets are colored purple, while As atoms
deposited during crystallization are blue. Right panel: AFM images of the GaAs growth fronts in partially
crystallized droplets after 10 seconds (top), 40 seconds (middle) and 90 seconds (bottom). Crystallization was
obtained at T = 150◦C and 5 × 10−7 Torr As pressure.
A
FAs = 0.1 ML/sec
B
FAs = 0.2 ML/sec
C
10 nm
FAs = 0.4 ML/sec
FIG. 7: (Color online) Nanorings formed at T = 375◦C
and FAs = 0.10, 0.20 and 0.40 ML/s.
ried out until a mixed (2×1) (1×2) surface reconstruction
was clearly obtained. After this step, the substrate tem-
perature was decreased to either 200 ◦C (sample A) or
600 ◦C (sample B) for Ga deposition. Here a Ga molecu-
lar beam ﬂux was supplied with a deposition rate of 0.075
ML/s and a background pressure below 5 × 10−10 Torr
for a total of 3.0 ML of Ga. Finally the crystallization of
Ga was achieved at 150 ◦C by exposure to an As ﬂux of
5 × 10−5 Torr for 5 minutes. During the As irradiation,
the RHEED pattern turned from halo, indicative of liq-
uid droplets, to spotty, signalling the formation of three
dimensional structures. However, a clear spotty pattern
was not observed for the larger islands.
For TEM observations an FEG (Field Emission Gun)
TEM/STEM 2200 FS JEOL instrument operated at 200
kV was used. It was equipped with an energy dispersive
X-ray spectrometer (EDS) and an in-column Omega-type
Energy Filter. By the latter, elemental maps of Ga and
As can be obtained in the energy ﬁltering operation mode
of the TEM (EF-TEM). The EF-TEM elemental maps11
C
t = 2.4 secs
5 nm
B
t = 1.8 secs
A
t = 0 secs
FIG. 8: (Color online) Simulation snapshots at times
t = 0, 1.8, 2.4 seconds after crystallization, T = 150◦C
and FAs = 0.8 ML/s.
where acquired with a GATAN slow scan CCD camera
controlled by the Digital Micrograph software. The maps
were obtained by recording the intensity of the L3 ab-
sorption edge for Ga (at 1116 eV) and As (at 1323 eV).
One post-edge and two pre-edge images were acquired
using a slit of 50 eV for both Ga and As.
From the
two pre-edge images the background image was evaluated
which was then subtracted from the post-edge image to
get the relevant elemental map. EDS maps were obtained
in the STEM operation mode with a spot size of 1 nm
and recording the intensity of the L characteristic X-ray
emission lines of Ga (1096 keV) and As (1282 keV). The
JEOL ultra-thin window Si detector and software were
employed for acquisition of the maps. Dead time during
measurements was 5-6% and counting time of the order
of 8-10 minutes.
The TEM top views of islands from sample A, ob-
tained with diﬀraction vector g = [2-20] clearly show
Moir´e fringes, due to the interference between the crys-
tal lattice of the island (GaAs) and that the Si substrate
(Figure 11).
EDS map scans show the same distribu-
tion of the Ga and As signals, which mimics the island
shape, thus demonstrating the correct stoichiometry of
the GaAs all over the island volume – i.e. a fully crys-
tallized island. A diﬀerent scenario is shown by sample
B. Here the nanostructure generated Moir´e interference
fringes are visible only at the island edges with a feature-
less center. EDS maps scans show that the distribution
of Ga and As are extremely diﬀerent inside the island
(Figure 12). While the Ga signal intensity follows the is-
land proﬁle, As intensity is peaked at the island perimeter
A
t = 0.0 secs
D
t = 2.0 secs
5 nm
C
t = 0.2 secs
B
t = 0.1 secs
FIG. 9: (Color online) Simulation snapshots of a
quantum dot annealed at high temperature at time t
after temperature was increased. (A) The dot after
exposure to As deposition at FAs = 0.80 ML/s and
temperature T = 150◦C. This results in a
polycrystalline GaAs shell trapping a liquid Ga core.
(B)-(D) Temperature is increased to T = 350◦C and the
atoms rearrange in order to fully crystallize the liquid
core.
with a small, though non-zero, As signal coming from the
center. Such a distribution is conﬁrmed by EF-TEM (en-
ergy ﬁltered TEM) measurements, and implies a metallic
Ga core similar to the one depicted in Figure 10.
The experiment rules out the presence of a liquid Ga
core/ GaAs shell structure by means of surface nucleation
due to the fact that the shell is monocrystalline and ap-
pears only for the high droplet radius. Nucleation at the
liquid-solid interface is predicted to be driven more by the
growth temperature and As ﬂux. Because both samples
were performed at the same growth conditions, if nucle-
ation driven GaAs shells were to occur, it must occur in
both samples. Because this is not the case, we may con-
clude that the liquid cores observed in the experiments
are driven by an MS instability.12
B
t = 1.8 secs
C
t=2.0 secs
10 nm
A
t = 1.4 secs
FIG. 10: (Color online) Snapshots of liquid core
formation at times t = 1.4, 1.8 and 2.0 seconds after
crystallization at temperature T = 350◦C and
deposition rate FAs = 1.0 ML/s.
a)
b) Ga
c) As
FIG. 11: (Color online) Sample A. (a) Planar view
TEM micrograph of two (70 nm diameter) GaAs
microislands. (b) and (c) EDS maps of Ga and As,
respectively, of the islands in (a).
V.
MODEL ANALYSIS
Both simulations and experiments have shown that
droplet epitaxy can result in a wide range of morpholo-
gies depending on the growth conditions. By varying FAs
and T , we have established their eﬀect on the resulting
nanostructures observed in simulations. From this data,
it is clear that compact islands form at low temperature
and, as the As overpressure is reduced or the temperature
is increased the nanostructures become rings. In cases of
large FAs, core-shell structures are observed. The simu-
lation results are summarized in the structural map given
in Figure 13. In this section, we will appeal to physical
and mathematical arguments to further explain the sim-
ulation results. In particular, the solid lines in Figure 13
that delineate the morphological structure will be derived
in this section.
We argue that various morphologies observed both in
experiments and simulations can be explained in the con-
220
a)
b)
c) Ga
d) As
e) Ga
f) As
FIG. 12: (Color online) Sample B. (a) SEM image of a
GaAs microisland(250 nm diameter). (b)Planar view
TEM micrograph of a GaAs microisland. (c) and
(d)EDS maps of Ga and As, respectively,of the island in
(b). (e) and (f) EF-TEM image for Ga and As,
respectively, of another GaAs microisland (TEM image
not shown).
1/350
1/300
1/250
1/200
1/150
10
−1
10
0
1/T (°C−1)
FAs (ML/sec)
 
 
Nucleation
Liquid Cores
Nanorings
Compact Structure
FIG. 13: (Color online) Morphological Dependence on
Growth Conditions. This nanostructural phase map
summarizes simulation results of droplet epitaxy and
crystallization at various As deposition rates and
temperatures. The three boundary curves indicate
theoretically derived critical conditions delineating the
simulation results and obtained in this section. The
left-most, black line is given by Equation (9). The
middle, red curve corresponds to Equation (13). The
right-most, blue curve is given by Equation (12).
text of three key processes active during nanostructure
formation. In the ﬁrst Ga atoms in the liquid drop will
be “wicked” out of the droplet onto the substrate by
capillary-type forces when exposed to an As overpres-
sure. These forces arise as it is energetically favorable13
for As atoms on the surface to become fully coordinated
with Ga atoms. Next, As atoms deposited near or on the
droplet diﬀuse rapidly20 through the liquid and attach
on a growing GaAs front at the liquid-solid interface,
crystallizing the droplet epitaxially. Finally, As atoms
may also nucleate near the vapor-liquid interface. These
three processes: wicking, crystallization and nucleation
are illustrated in Figure 14. The relative rates at which
these processes occur depend on growth conditions and
will determine the resulting morphology.
Nucleation
Wicking
FIG. 14: (Color online) Schematic of kinetic processes
that determine nanostructural development.
A.
Nanoring Formation
The formation of nanorings is a competition between
the wicking and crystallization processes. The crystal-
lization process results in GaAs fronts that grow until the
liquid Ga is consumed. If the fronts coalesce before this
occurs, the resulting nanostructure is a compact quan-
tum dot. If however, the liquid Ga is consumed before
the fronts come together, nanorings result.
To compare the rates of the two processes, we establish
expressions for the velocity of the GaAs front as well
as the rate at which Ga atoms are wicked out of the
droplet. Assuming quasi-static deposition, the velocity
vn of the GaAs front under an As deposition rate FAs
scales according to that rate:
vn = gℓFAs,
(3)
where ℓis the atomic spacing of the lattice and g is fac-
tor that depends shape of the liquid region and possible
diﬀerence in the As adsorption probability between the
droplet itself and its surroundings. For simplicity, g = 1.
In the wicking process, Ga atoms are driven from the
droplet by the deposition of As on the surface away from
the droplet. The time scale of the wicking process is given
by
τ =
1
FAs
,
(4)
while the diﬀusion length scale is given by
λ =
s
D′
Ga
FAs
,
(5)
where D′
Ga is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of Ga diﬀusing on
a mostly Ga terminated surface, in the presence of As
deposition. We have
D′
Ga = ℓ2R0 exp

−E′
Ga
kBT

,
where R0 = 1013s−1 was deﬁned in Section II to be a
rate prefactor.
The energy barrier E′
Ga = 1.26 eV describing the dif-
fusion of Ga on surface not purely Ga terminated is ob-
tained from the harmonic average of the diﬀusion rates
of Ga-on-Ga diﬀusion and Ga-on-As diﬀusion. By pre-
scribing a constant value E′
Ga that describes the eﬀective
energetic barrier for diﬀusion on a mostly Ga-terminated
surface, we have assumed that the diﬀusivity through-
out the domain is constant. In reality, diﬀusivity is spa-
tially dependent due to diﬀerences in surface reconstruc-
tion near and away from the liquid Ga as observed in
micro-RHEED experiments by Isu et al.37. This eﬀect
is also at the origin of the possibility, oﬀered by droplet
epitaxy, to tune ring morphologies16. In extreme growth
regimes when temperature is less than 150◦C and As
overpressure greater than 5 × 10−5 Torr, the surface re-
construction may change rapidly even in the proximity of
the droplet, implying that the spatial dependence on dif-
fusivity is an important eﬀect. Away from such growth
conditions, however, assuming constant eﬀective diﬀusiv-
ity is a reasonable approximation.
Equations (4) and (5) yield a velocity vw for the wick-
ing of Ga atom from the liquid droplet
vw = λ
τ = ℓ
p
R0FAs exp

−E′
Ga
2kBT

.
(6)
A fully crystallized quantum dot forms under conditions
where the crystallization process is dominant (vn ≫vw).
However, if the wicking process is suﬃciently fast (vn ∼
vw), then as described above, the fronts may fail to coa-
lesce, resulting in a nanoring. The critical conﬁguration
separating these two scenarios occurs when the crystal-
lization fronts are tangent to each other. To express this
critical condition quantitatively, consider the volume of
unconsumed liquid Ga at time t:
V (t) = V0 −2ℓvwt −2ρ1(vnt)2,
(7)
where ρ1 = π
4 is a shape constant describing the geometry
of the crystallization front (which we model as a quarter-
circle) and
V0 = ρ2r2,
is the initial volume of the liquid droplet of radius r, ρ2 =
3π
4 being the shape constant that describes the geometry
of the droplet. As a ﬁrst-order approximation, the value
of ρ2 is selected as the average of the shape constant
describing a circular and half-circular droplet. The radius
of a Ga droplet obtained from the deposition of 4.0 ML
of Ga atoms at temperature T and ﬂux FGa was found14
empirically from independent simulations to follow the
power law:
r = ℓ1−2αr0
DGa
FGa
α
,
(8)
where r0 = 11.34 (# atoms) and α = 0.182 are empir-
ically obtained values.
DGa is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
for Ga-on-Ga diﬀusion with corresponding energy bar-
rier EGa = 0.9 eV. The positive root tf of equation (7)
describes the time when all Ga has been consumed. The
length of the crystallized front is then given by vntf, and
the critical condition may be expressed as
vntf = r
Using equations (8), (3), and (6) , this critical conﬁgu-
ration can be written in terms of the growth conditions
as
F r
As =

2F α
Ga
(ρ2 −2ρ1) gr0
2
R1−2α
0
exp
2αEGa −E′
Ga
kBT

.
(9)
If FAs > F r
As then compact structures will result on other
hand if FAs < F r
As nanorings will result. Figure 7 illus-
trates the transition from nanorings to compact quan-
tum dots with increasing FAs. The black line in Figure
13 shows a plot of F r
As vs. 1/T . The agreement with
the simulation data is quite good – it separates com-
pact structures (black dots in the ﬁgure) from nanorings
(black circles).
A crucial assumption has been made in the argument
presented here, namely that no nucleation takes place
within the Ga droplet and the crystallizing front moves
in a stable fashion (i.e. no Mullins-Sekerka instability oc-
curs). In what follows we shall examine in what regimes
in parameter space these factors play an important role.
B.
Nucleation
Here we will demonstrate that when the As deposition
rate is suﬃciently large and temperature is low enough,
the dominant process will be nucleation at the vapor-
liquid interface. As a consequence, the wicking process
makes a negligible contribution to the morphology. The
rate of the nucleation process at the vapor-liquid inter-
face may be estimated by considering the As concentra-
tion cAs(x, y, t) within a domain of liquid Ga in contact
with a GaAs substrate and As ﬂux. For simplicity we
will consider the domain to be rectangular with periodic
boundary conditions in the horizontal direction. Assum-
ing quasi-static deposition at a rate FAs ML/s and tem-
perature T , the concentration satisﬁes
∇2cAs = 0,
ℓDAs
∂cAs
∂y

y=L
= FAs,
cAs

y=0
= c0
where c0 is the equilibrium As concentration above a ﬂat
liquid-solid interface and the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
DAs = ℓ2R0 exp

−ǫD
kBT

,
describes the diﬀusion of As through liquid Ga, ǫD = 0.7
eV being the energy barrier for diﬀusion throughout the
liquid droplet deﬁned earlier in Section II.
The equilibrium concentration c0 is of the form
c0 = ℓ−2 exp
EA −ED
kBT

,
where ED, EA are the energy barriers for the detachment
and attachment of an As atom in the liquid phase from
and onto a ﬂat interface, respectively, deﬁned in Section
II. From this diﬀusion model, the equilibrium concentra-
tion csurf at the surface of the droplet is given by
csurf = FAsL
ℓ3R0
exp
 ǫD
kBT

+ ℓ−2 exp
EA −ED
kBT

, (10)
where L is the height of the droplet.
Nucleation is most likely to occur where the As con-
centration is the largest, near the vapor-liquid interface.
This means that nucleation will occur when csurf is larger
than some critical concentration:
csurf ≥c0 exp
Enuc
kBT

,
(11)
where Enuc = 0.01 eV is the nucleation barrier of GaAs
in liquid Ga, treated as a ﬁtting parameter. Replacing
L in equation (10) with the droplet radius r, the critical
condition (11) for surface nucleation can be expressed in
terms of T and FAs as:15
F n
As = R1−α
0
F α
Ga
r0
exp
EA −ED −ǫD + αEGa
kBT
 
exp
Enuc
kBT

−1

.
(12)
If the As deposition rate exceeds F n
As then GaAs crystal-
lites will form at the vapor-liquid interface, as illustrated
in Figure 8. The blue line in Figure 13 is a plot F n
As as
function of 1/T . It accurately predicts the presence of
nucleation in simulation results (blue triangles).
C.
Mullins-Sekerka Instability
In the case where the rates of both the wicking and nu-
cleation processes are negligible, the crystallization pro-
cess dominates, resulting in the growth of crystallization
fronts at the triple point and in registry with the sub-
strate.
As observed in Section IV B 2, this growth can be un-
stable due to a Mullins-Sekerka instability leading to
GaAs shells epitaxial to the substrate surrounding a liq-
uid Ga core. Perturbations to the planar growth front
of suﬃciently long wavelength experience this instability,
and a standard linear perturbation analysis38,39 yields a
critical wavelength
Λc = 2πℓ3/2
r
R0γ
FAskBT exp
EA −ED −ǫD
2kBT

,
where γ = 0.1 eV is the liquid/solid interfacial energy,
obtained directly from the model. In order to accommo-
date perturbations that experience the MS instability,
droplets necessarily must have radius on the order of Λc,
i.e. r ≥CΛc, for some constant C. This critical condi-
tion may be expressed in terms of FAs and T using the
above equation along with the model for droplet radius
(8):
F ms
As = C2ℓ
2πF α
Gaℓ
r0
2
γ
kBT R1−2α
0
exp
EA −ED −ǫD + 2αEGa
kBT

.
(13)
If F ms
As < FAs < F n
As then liquid cores will form via a
Mullins-Sekerka instability.
Figure 13 shows a plot of
F ms
As vs 1/T . The scaling constant C = 1
8 was selected to
best match simulation results, though its speciﬁc value
do not aﬀect the qualitative shape of the boundary curve,
and in particular its slope. The simulation results when a
liquid core was observed are plotted as red triangles. We
observe that the theoretical curve slightly underestimates
the instability within the simulations. This underestima-
tion is inherent to our model and can be attributed to dis-
crete eﬀects. Such eﬀects on nucleation and hence insta-
bilities of the type outlined above are indeed well-studied
in the context of diﬀusion limited aggregation40,41.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We have presented experimental, simulation and an-
alytical results detailing the precise relationship be-
tween growth conditions and the resulting nanostruc-
tures formed in droplet epitaxy and crystallization ex-
periments. The KMC model used in conjunction with
experiments was presented as an explicitly atomistic,
multi-species, multi-phase model capable of simulating
all the relevant processes involved with GaAs homoepi-
taxy, droplet epitaxy and crystallization. As an initial
validation, the KMC model accurately reproduces surface
termination diagram in the case of GaAs homoepitaxy.
We then presented simulation and experimental results of
droplet formation and crystallization, exhibiting a qual-
itative agreement on the resulting morphological depen-
dence on As ﬂux and temperature. Both experiments and
simulation suggest a continuum of structures ranging be-
tween compact quantum dots to broad nanorings as a
function of As ﬂux and temperature. Simulations also
suggest the existence of Ga/GaAs core shell structures,
as well as elucidating the mechanisms behind their for-
mation. The simulations suggested that a quantum dot
with a liquid core could result due to a Mullins-Sekerka
instability during the growth of the GaAs front. We pre-
sented experiments which validate this hypothesis.
In
the case of nucleation-driven shells, we provide simula-
tion evidence suggesting that under high temperature an-
nealing, polycrystalline shells may be recrystallized into
an epitaxial GaAs island. Lastly, we developed a unify-
ing theory identifying three key processes active during
crystallization. It predicts the existence of all the phe-
nomena observed above and their dependence on growth
conditions and compares well with empirical simulation
data.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
P.S. and K.R. were supported in part by NSF sup-
port grants DMS-0854870 and DMS-1115252. D.N. and16
J.M.M. acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the NSF
through Grant No. DMR-0906909. S.B., C.S. and S.S.
acknowledge the CARIPLO Foundation for ﬁnancial sup-
port (prj. SOQQUADRO - no. 2011-0362)
1 M. Kastner, Physics Today 46, 24 (1993).
2 J. Li and Wang, Nano Letters 3, 1357 (2003).
3 N. Koguchi, S. Takahashi, and T. Chikyow, Journal of
Crystal Growth 111, 688 (1991).
4 N. Koguchi, K. Ishige, and S. Takahashi (1993), vol. 11,
pp. 787–790.
5 N. Koguchi and K. Ishige, Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics 32, 2052 (1993).
6 K. Watanabe, N. Koguchi, and Y. Gotoh, Japanese Jour-
nal of Applied Physics 39, L79 (2000).
7 T. Mano, T. Kuroda, S. Sanguinetti, T. Ochiai, T. Tateno,
J. Kim, T. Noda, M. Kawabe, K. Sakoda, G. Kido, et al.,
Nano Letters 5, 425 (2005).
8 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti,
Nano Letters 9, 3419 (2009).
9 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, A. Scaccabarozzi, E. Grilli,
and S. Sanguinetti, Crystal Growth and Design 12, 1180
(2012).
10 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, S. Sanguinetti, N. Koguchi, and
A. Fedorov, Nanotechnology 21, 125601 (2010).
11 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti,
Nanotechnology 22, 185602 (2011).
12 T. Shitara, D. D. Vvedensky, M. R. Wilby, J. Zhang, J. H.
Neave, and B. A. Joyce, Phys. Rev. B 46, 6815 (1992).
13 T. Kawamura and A. Ishii, Surface Science 438, 155
(1999).
14 T. Kawamura and A. Ishii, Surface Science 493, 438
(2001).
15 A. Ishii and T. Kawamura, Surface Science 436, 38 (1999).
16 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti,
Applied Physics Letters 97, 203109 (2010).
17 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, A. Fedorov, N. Koguchi, and
S. Sanguinetti, Nanoscale Research Letters 5, 18651867
(2010).
18 A. Chakrabarti, P. Kratzer, and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev.
B 74, 245328 (2006).
19 C. Orme, M. D. Johnson, J. L. Sudijono, K. T. Leung, and
B. G. Orr, Applied Physics Letters 64, 860 (1994).
20 V. Gorokhov, T. Dedegkaev, Y. Ilyin, V. Moshnikov,
A. Petrov, Y. Sosov, and D. Yaskov, Crystal Res. and
Technol. 19, 1465 (1984).
21 K. Reyes (2013).
22 M. Biehl, in Multiscale Modeling in Epitaxial Growth,
edited by A. Voigt (2005), vol. 149 of International Series
of Numerical Mathematics, pp. 3–18.
23 J. L. Blue, I. Beichl, and F. Sullivan, Phys. Rev. E 51,
R867 (1995).
24 A. Ohtake, Surface Science Reports 63, 295 (2008).
25 I. Ferguson, A. de Oliveira, and B. Joyce, Journal of Crys-
tal Growth 121, 267 (1992).
26 B. Liang and C. Tu, Journal of Crystal Growth 128, 538
(1993).
27 H. Yamaguchi and Y. Horikoshi, Journal of Applied
Physics 71, 1753 (1992).
28 Z. M. Wang, B. L. Liang, K. A. Sablon, and G. J. Salamo,
Applied Physics Letters 90, 113120 (2007).
29 T. Kuroda, T. Mano, T. Ochiai, S. Sanguinetti, K. Sakoda,
G. Kido, and N. Koguchi, Phys. Rev. B 72, 205301 (2005).
30 K. Watanabe, S. Tsukamoto, Y. Gotoh, and N. Koguchi,
Journal of Crystal Growth 227228, 1073 (2001).
31 T. Kuroda, S. Sanguinetti, M. Gurioli, K. Watanabe,
F. Minami, and N. Koguchi, Phys. Rev. B 66, 121302
(2002).
32 S. Sanguinetti, K. Watanabe, T. Tateno, M. Wakaki,
N. Koguchi, T. Kuroda, F. Minami, and M. Gurioli, Ap-
plied Physics Letters 81, 613 (2002).
33 C. Heyn, A. Stemmann, M. Klingbeil, C. Strelow, T. Kp-
pen, S. Mendach, and W. Hansen, Journal of Crystal
Growth 323, 263 (2011).
34 C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, A. Fedorov, N. Koguchi, and
S. Sanguinetti,
Journal of Crystal Growth 323,
279
(2011).
35 T. Mano, M. Abbarchi, T. Kuroda, C. A. Mastrandrea,
A. Vinattieri, S. Sanguinetti, K. Sakoda, and M. Gurioli,
Nanotechnology 20, 395601 (2009).
36 L. Cavigli, S. Bietti, N. Accanto, S. Minari, M. Abbarchi,
G. Isella, C. Frigeri, A. Vinattieri, M. Gurioli, and S. San-
guinetti, Applied Physics Letters 100, 231112 (2012).
37 T. Isu, M. Hata, and A. Watanabe, Journal of Crystal
Growth 111, 210 (1991).
38 G. S. Bales and A. Zangwill, Phys. Rev. B 41, 5500 (1990).
39 B. Caroli, C. Caroli, and B. Roulet, in Solids far from
equilibrium, edited by C. Godr´eche (Cambridge University
Press, 1992), pp. 155–296.
40 G. Russo, L. M. Sander, and P. Smereka, Phys. Rev. B 69,
121406 (2004).
41 T. A. Witten and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400
(1981).