1 
 
Aluminum oxide – n-Si field effect inversion layer solar cells with organic top contact 
 
 
A.S. Erickson, N.K. Kedem, A.E. Haj-Yahia,  D. Cahen 
Dept. of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel 
 
We demonstrate a solar cell that uses fixed negative charges formed at the interface of n-
Si with Al2O3 to generate strong inversion at the surface of n-Si by electrostatic repulsion. 
Built-in voltages of up to 755 mV are found at this interface. In order to to harness this 
large built-in voltage, we present a photovoltaic device where the photocurrent generated 
in this inversion layer is extracted via an inversion layer induced by a high work function 
transparent organic top contact, deposited on top of a passivating and dipole-inducing 
molecular monolayer. Results of the effect of the molecular monolayer on device 
performance yield open-circuit voltages of up to 550 mV for moderately doped Si, 
demonstrating the effectiveness of this contact structure in removing the Fermi level 
pinning that has hindered past efforts in developing this type of solar cell with n-type Si. 
 
 
The standard process for producing commercial silicon solar cells is highly energy 
intensive, requiring about 1.5 GJ per panel to produce polycrystalline panels of area 0.65 m2.1 A 
major hindrance to reducing the cost of silicon solar cells is the high temperature dopant 
diffusion step in forming the emitter. In addition to the large amount of energy required to 
maintain a temperature of 900 C for multiple hours, in order to diffuse dopants from the surface 
into a Si wafer, such high temperature requirements preclude the use of inexpensive methods of 
forming the Si base using substrates such as glass or metal foils. Inversion layer solar cells2 
 
circumvent this high temperature step by replacing the conventional doped p-n junction with a p-
n junction induced in the top region of the substrate, using low temperature surface treatments 
alone. 
An inversion layer can be formed by contacting an n- (p-) type semiconductor with a high 
(low) work function metal, forming a Schottky barrier that is high enough so that minority 
carriers become dominant in a narrow layer at the surface. This occurs at a built-in voltage of Vbi 
> (EG/2 - |EC-EF|), for an n-type semiconductor in contact with a high work function metal, where 
EG is the semiconductor band gap energy and EC is the conduction band edge energy. This 
effectively forms a p-n homojunction, while avoiding the energy-intensive processing steps, 
involved in doping. If the Schottky barrier is high enough that the carrier concentration in the 
inversion layer exceeds the dopant density, the junction is in strong inversion, and generally 
exhibits higher mobility due to improved screening of impurities. In practice, however, for Si 
and other covalent semiconductors, Fermi level pinning limits the actual barrier height of these 
types of devices, unless adequate surface passivation can be provided.2  
Instead of using a metallic top contact to generate inversion in Si, fixed charges held at 
the interface of Si with a dielectric, such as Al2O3 or SiOx, can generate inversion by electrostatic 
repulsion, if the majority carrier type of the Si substrate is of the same sign as the fixed charge at 
the interface, and if the density of fixed charges is high enough. This reduces the impact of Fermi 
level pinning by taking advantage of dielectrics that also passivate the Si surface. The most 
effective solar cells based on this concept were made in the SiO - p-Si system, where positive 
fixed charges at the Si-SiO interface generate inversion near the surface of the Si substrate.  
Devices made from thin SiO layers on p-Si, using thin-oxide tunnel junction contacts, reached 
16.8% efficiency (active area), for Czochralski-grown substrates, implying 12.6% total device3 
 
area efficiency, given the reported 25% shading.3 The interface between Al2O3 and Si contains 
up to 1013 cm-3 fixed negative charges, an order of magnitude higher than the positive charge 
density found at the SiO/Si interface, 4,5 which lead to field effect passivation in p-type and 
inversion in n-type Si.5,6 The higher charge density at this interface should lead to stronger 
inversion than that found in the previously investigated SiO-Si system, and potentially, also to 
better device performance. However, making contact to such a device using an n-Si/oxide/metal 
junction, as was used in the p-Si/SiO system described above,3 will not work as well, due to the 
low open circuit voltages typically found for metal-insulator-n-Si solar cells.7,8 For this reason, n-
Si inversion layer solar cells have not been extensively studied in the literature. Instead, metal-Si 
junctions, where the Si surface has been modified and passivated by a molecular monolayer to 
suppress Fermi level pinning, show more promise in generating the high Voc needed for these 
devices, while maintaining the desired low processing temperatures.9 
In this letter, we demonstrate inversion layer solar cells based on the negatively charged 
interface between Al2O3 and n-Si. Figure 1(a) shows a proposed band diagram of this interface 
(adapted from ref. 6). We show that the negative fixed charge density leads to a built-in voltage 
(Vbi) of up to 755 mV, more than sufficient to reach strong inversion for a substrate donor 
concentration, ND, less than 5x1016 cm-3. As a thickness of at least 10-15 nm Al2O3 is required to 
achieve a high interface charge density,5 contact points to extract carriers must be etched through 
the Al2O3, which naturally removes inversion at the point of contact. A selective contact must 
then be formed, in order to avoid shorting to the n-type substrate. This can be done by diffusing 
p-type dopants at the contacts, which would create a conventional doped p-n junction at the 
contact. However, the same high temperatures we seek to avoid would be required for this step. 
Instead, we use a high work function top contact to generate inversion with room temperature4 
 
processing. To remove Fermi level pinning, we first deposit a molecular monolayer (MM) of a 
strongly electron-donating molecule, ethylene toluene, to provide electronic passivation, as well 
as to introduce a dipole that can modify the electron affinity of the underlying Si, to increase the 
Schottky barrier height.9,10 We then apply the organic conductor poly(ethylenedioxy 
thiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)  (PEDOT:PSS) as a high work function top contact, using a 
soft-deposition method that preserves the MM. We show that this contact structure leads to 
strong inversion for a substrate donor concentration, ND < 1015 cm-3, though Vbi in this 
configuration is 50-100 mV lower than that under the Al2O3 interface, and demonstrate the 
impact of the dipole-inducing MM at this interface on device performance. 
The device structure is diagrammed in figure 1(b). In this configuration, under 
illumination, electron-hole pairs are primarily generated underneath the strong inversion layer 
created by the Al2O3 – n-Si interface and separated by the large Vbi, present in this region. The 
hole is then transported through the inversion layer to the MM-passivated PEDOT:PSS contact, 
while the electron reaches the back contact via the Si substrate. Using this technique to create a 
p-n homojunction in n-Si, while maintaining processing temperature below 450 °C, we reach a 
best total area power conversion efficiency of 8.4%, with an average over 6 devices of 7.9(4)%. 
The lowering of required temperatures allows cheaper substrates to be used, making this method 
compatible with recent developments in forming inexpensive thin-film Si on glass substrates,11 in 
addition to lowering the total amount of energy required to form the emitter. In this letter, single 
crystal Si is used as a model system, to better characterize the relevant interfaces and the 
resulting device performance trends. 
Aluminum oxide was deposited by plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) in 
a Cambridge NanoTech Fiji F200 system at a substrate temperature of 250 °C on 400-500 m5 
 
thick, single side polished, (111) oriented, P-doped n-type, Czochralski-grown single crystal Si 
wafers that had been thoroughly degreased and etched to leave a clean, smooth, and 
electronically well-passivated Si-H surface. The sample was then annealed for 30 min at 425 °C, 
to reduce the interface trap density.12 Film thickness was measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, 
and confirmed by TEM, where a 3 nm layer of SiOx was found at the interface of Si with Al2O3, 
typical for these deposition conditions.5 Contact fingers of width 15 m and spacing 50-150 m, 
with a total device area 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm, were patterned by photolithography onto the Al2O3 
films, and the exposed Al2O3 was then etched away. A MM of ethylene toluene was deposited by 
a method described elsewhere,10 using ethynyl toluene as a molecular precursor, to passivate the 
exposed Si surface before depositing the top contact. The processing required for MM deposition 
resulted in a reduction of the Al2O3 thickness from 40 nm to 25 nm, due to etching steps used to 
prepare at the contacts the Si-H surface that is required to achieve a high quality MM. The 
presence of Al2O3 in these devices required a reduction in etching time from the optimal 15 
min10 to 2 min, to preserve the quality of the Al2O3 layer, a change that was found to affect 
device performance, as described below. MM characterization is described in reference 10. A 
200 nm thick film of PEDOT:PSS (Pedot P, H.C. Starck), doped with 5% ethylene glycol and 
0.4% zonyl surfactant was deposited by spin-coating onto a sacrificial glass substrate and 
annealed for 30 min at 150 °C in a nitrogen environment. This film was then deposited onto the 
device by the lift-off-float-on (LOFO) method,13,14 preventing exposure of the MM to the acidic, 
aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution. Devices made by similar methods but with direct deposition of 
spin-coated PEDOT:PSS were not as efficient. A 200 nm thick Ag collection grid, contributing 
15% shading, was deposited by e-beam evaporation, and In-Ga eutectic was used as the back 
contact. Photovoltaic performance was evaluated using two-probe I-V techniques, with a 1006 
 
mW/cm2 W-halogen lamp, calibrated using a commercial silicon diode. Two of the best devices 
were also measured under a solar simulator to verify the efficiency. A 3% increase in the short 
circuit current was found, relative to the halogen lamp, and is likely due to improved 
transparency of PEDOT:PSS in the UV, where the actual solar spectrum is stronger that of the 
halogen lamp. 
The inversion layer formed by the Al2O3 - n-type Si interface was characterized on Si 
with a 30 nm thick Al2O3 layer, by capacitance-voltage (C-V) profiling and by Kelvin probe 
surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements. The fixed charge density at the interface, Qf, was 
determined from the flat-band voltage, Vfb, measured from the C-V profile, taken at an applied 
frequency of 1 MHz, by the relation          
  
   , where     is the difference in Fermi 
energy between the metal contact and semiconductor substrate, and Cox is the oxide capacitance, 
measured by C-V.15 The interface trap density, Dit, referring to charge states in the Al2O3 layer 
that interact electrically with mobile carriers in the Si substrate, was determined for ND = 5 x 
1014 cm-3 by comparing data taken at 100 Hz and at 1 MHz.16 This measurement was not done 
for samples with ND = 5x1013 cm-3 due to spurious effects at low frequency, thought to arise 
from poor contact to the In-Ga eutectic at low substrate ND. The built-in voltage, Vbi, was 
measured by SPV. The carrier concentration in the inversion layer, p(IL), was then determined 
from the measured Vbi and the offset between EF and the conduction band edge, EC, in the bulk 
Si. For the case of ND = 5 x 1014, the built-in voltage was measured by C-V to be 755 mV, 100 
mV larger than that found by SPV. Due to inherent limitations in determining the 
photosaturation limit in SPV measurements,17 the value of Vbi derived from SPV, presents a 
lower limit, and the value from C-V is considered more accurate. However, as C-V at low 
frequency was not possible for the sample with lower doping, Vbi measured by SPV was used to7 
 
compare p(IL). Additionally, Vbi at the PEDOT:PSS – MM – n-Si contact was measured by SPV 
in two test devices with no Al2O3, with ND = 5 x 1014, and was found to be 50-100 mV lower 
than at the Al2O3 – n-type Si interface, when also measured by SPV. 
The fixed charge density, Qf, measured by C-V, reached 3.2(5) x 1012 cm-2, with the 
interface trap density, Dit, as low as 1011 cm-2, near the values expected for high quality Al2O3 
passivation layers, reported in the literature.5 The resulting built-in voltage, Vbi, measured by 
SPV and, for the case of ND = 5 x 1014 cm-3, by C-V methods, is shown in figure 2 (right axis). 
The carrier concentration near the surface, derived from Vbi, indicates inversion in all cases 
studied, and strong inversion for ND < 5 x 1016 cm-3 (fig. 2, left axis). Additionally, low 
frequency C(V) behavior was seen as high as 100 kHz, which lends further proof to our claim of 
strong inversion.15 Details are presented in supplemental information, available online.18 
Photovoltaic performance results are shown in figure 3, where devices of different ND are 
compared, and the results are summarized in Table I. For higher doping substrates, with ND = 
5x1015 cm-3, the built-in voltage measured by SPV indicates that the devices are near the strong 
inversion limit. These devices show poor performance at 150 m and 100 m contact spacing, 
yielding significant photocurrent only at the narrowest spacing, 50 m, where the fill factor 
remained low. The s-shape near Voc is characteristic of a reverse diode, which in this device may 
lie at the junction between the stronger inversion layer at the Al2O3-Si interface, and the weaker 
one induced by the PEDOT:PSS. Holes traveling from the higher to lower doping when moving 
from the strong IL under the Al2O3 to the contact will experience a transport barrier. When ND is 
reduced to 5x1014 cm-3, where strong inversion is found over the entire device area, significant 
improvements in all performance parameters are observed. In this case, devices with 50 m or 
100 m contact spacing showed equally good performance (figure 3, red solid line), with8 
 
average efficiency reaching 7.9(4)% and a maximum of 8.4%. This suggests that the mobility in 
this inversion layer, which is expected to increase with increasing inversion strength due to 
improved screening of donor ions, is sufficient to extract carriers over the larger distances. When 
ND is further reduced to 5x1013 cm-3, an improvement in short circuit current shows the effect of 
the strongest inversion layer, and devices with contact spacing up to 150 m showed good 
performance. However, the reduced fill factor, likely due to the increased series resistance of the 
substrate, reduces overall efficiency.  
Several types of control devices were made using wafers with ND = 5 x 1014 cm-3, to 
assess the relative impact of different factors in device fabrication. Figure 3 (green dash-dot line) 
shows the performance of a device with the same structure as the devices described above, 
without the passivating molecular monolayer. Instead, the PEDOT:PSS was deposited by the 
same method on a Si-H terminated contact. In this case, a reverse diode was present in all 
samples measured. This is consistent with the proposed effect of the molecular dipole, which 
should strengthen the inversion layer at the PEDOT:PSS contact, reducing the potential barrier 
required for holes to pass to the contact.  
Two types of devices without Al2O3 were also studied, comprising a solar cell based 
solely on the n-type Si – MM - PEDOT:PSS (deposited by the LOFO method) junction. In one 
case, the restricted 2 min NH4F etch time required for the Al2O3 devices was used, to measure 
the effect of these limited etching conditions on device performance. In this case, only a 5.9(8)%  
average efficiency was found. If, however, optimal 15 min NH4F etch time is used in preparing 
the surface for the MM passivation,10 a device with only n-type Si – MM -  PEDOT:PSS 
structure reached an average efficiency of 7.4 ± 1.0%. The large error bar reflects the relatively 
poor reproducibility found for these devices, compared to the Al2O3-based devices. Additionally,9 
 
spin-coating PEDOT:PSS directly onto Si-H, using similar conditions to those provided in 
literature,19 led to an efficiency of only 7%. In all of the devices studied, the use of the In-Ga 
eutectic back contact is likely to impact efficiency through increased series resistance, compared 
to diffused back contacts. 
External quantum efficiency and reflectivity were also compared for a device with Al2O3, 
and for a PEDOT:PSS only device, prepared using the optimized sample preparation conditions, 
and is presented in supplementary material, available online.20 The enhancement in photocurrent 
for devices with Al2O3 was found to derive primarily from long wavelength (above 800 nm) and 
short wavelength (below 500 nm) regions, likely resulting from reduced reflectivity, and from 
improved collection in the bulk due to a wider depletion width arising from the stronger 
inversion layer, respectively. 
In summary, we demonstrated that the negatively-charged interface of Al2O3 with n-type 
Si produces large built-in voltages of up to 755 mV, 50-100 mV higher than that induced by 
PEDOT:PSS, leading to strong inversion for substrate doping concentrations less than 1015 cm-3. 
This built-in voltage was used as the primary charge separation potential in a solar cell, using 
contacts based on the interface of n-Si, passivated with a dipole-inducing molecular monolayer, 
with PEDOT:PSS as a high work function conductor. By comparing to devices with Si-H 
passivated contacts, we demonstrated the effect of the molecular dipole in enhancing inversion at 
the contacting interface. An average device efficiency of 7.9(4)% was reached, exceeding that of 
PEDOT:PSS - only devices, consistent with the larger built-in voltage found. Al2O3-based 
devices also showed vastly improved reproducibility over PEDOT:PSS – n-Si solar cells, 
suggesting that the inversion layer generated by the fixed charges is more robust to process 
variation than that induced by the organic conductor. Comparing optimized to actual MM10 
 
deposition conditions suggests that improvements in contact processing can yield further device 
improvements, and indications from C-V measurements at low frequency indicate that an 
improved back contact may also be helpful. 
We thank the Helmsley trust, the Wolfson family trust, and the Grand Center for Sensors 
and Security for partial support. We thank K.L. Narasimhan (TIFR, India) for support with C-V 
measurement and analysis, Ellen Moons (Karlstad Univ., Sweden) and Rotem Har-Lavan 
(Weizmann Institute of Science) for instructive conversations and the reviewer for suggesting the 
reflectivity experiment. ASE acknowledges a Weizmann Institute dean’s postdoctoral fellowship. 
DC holds the Schaefer Chair in Energy Research. 
References 
1. A. Stoppalo, Energy 33 224 (2008). 
2. J. Bardeen. Phys. Rev. 71, 717 (1947). 
3. R.G. Godfrey and M.A. Green, IEEE Transactions on Electronic Devices ED-27, 737 (1980). 
4. B.E. Deal, M. Sklar, A.S. Grove, and E.H. Snow, J. Electrochem. Soc.: Solid State Science 
114, 266 (1967). 
5. B. Hoex, J.J.H. Gielis, M.C.M. van de Sanden, and W.M.M. Kessels, J. Appl. Phys. 104, 
113703 (2008). 
6. B. Hoex, S.B.S. Heil, E. Langereis, M.C.M. van de Sanden, and W.M.M. Kessels, App. Phys. 
Lett. 89, 042112 (2006). 
7. D.L. Pulfrey, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices ED-25, 1308 (1978); A. Kumar, M.D. 
Rosenblum, D.L. Gilmore, B.J. Tufts, M.L. Rosenbluth, and N.S. Lewis, Applied Physics 
Letters 56, 1919 (1990).11 
 
8. Improved open circuit voltages were found for electrochemically oxidized n- Si/SiO2/Au 
devices at un-reported light intensity.7 However, further reports including device 
efficiency were not published. 
9. R. Har-Lavan, O. Yaffe, P. Joshi, R. Kazaz, H. Cohen, and D. Cahen, AIP Advances 2, 012164 
(2012). 
10. A.E.H. Yahia, The effect of binding and head group on the electrical properties of metal-
molecule-semiconductor junctions, M.Sc. Dissertation, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Israel (2011). 
11. A. Slaoui and P. Siffert, “Polycrystalline Silicon Films for Electronic Devices” in Silicon: 
Evolution and Future of a Technology, P. Siffert and E. Krimmel, eds. (Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 2004). 
12. J. Benick, A. Richter, T.-T.A. Li, N.E. Grant, K.R. McIntosh, Y. Ren, K.J. Weber, M. 
Hermle, S.W. Glunz, Proceedings of the 35th IEEE PVSC, Hawaii, 891 (2010). 
13. E. Moons, M. Breuning, A. Shanzer, J. Beier, and D. Cahen, Synthetic Metals 76, 245 (1996). 
14. A. Vilan and D. Cahen, Advanced Functional Materials 12, 795 (2002). 
15. E.H. Nicollian and J.R. Brews, MOS Physics and Technology, Wiley-Interscience, New 
Jersey, (2003). 
16. R. Castagne and A. Vapaille, Surface Sci. 28, 157 (1971) 
17. O.B. Aphek, L. Kronik, M. Leibovitch, Y. Shapira, Surface Science 409, 485 (1998). 
18. See supplementary material at [URL will be inserted by AIP] for detailed description of 
frequency-dependent C(V) results. 
19. Q. Liu, M. Ono, Z. Tang, R. Ishikawa, K. Ueno, and H. Shirai, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 183901 
(2012); M. Ono, Z. Tang, R. Ishikawa, T. Gotou, K. Ueno, and H. Shirai, Applied Physics12 
 
Express 5, 032301 (2012); T. –G. Chen, B.-Y. Huang, E.-C. Chen, P. Yu, and H. –F. 
Meng, Applied Physics Letters 101, 033301 (2012)).  
20. See supplementary material at [URL will be inserted by AIP] for detailed description of 
external quantum efficiency measurements.13 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 (color online). (a) Proposed band structure of Al2O3 – n-type Si interface (adapted from 
reference 5), showing the origin of the built-in voltage, Vbi. The interfacial SiOx layer arises 
during Al2O3 deposition. (b) Scheme of final device structure, showing proposed transport path 
for photogenerated carriers.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Built-in voltage, Vbi (open triangles, right axis), measured by SPV (up triangles), and 
by C-V (down triangle), and hole concentration in the inversion layer, p (filled circles, left axis), 
calculated from Vbi. Vertical error bars represent instrumental limits, error bars in ND stem from 
the doping range given for the source wafers, except for the case of the sample measured by C-V 
(down triangle), where ND was extracted from the C-V measurement and the error is smaller than 
the symbol.14 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 (color online). J(V) data, taken under 100 mW/cm2 light intensity for devices with 
different substrate dopant concentrations and contact spacing, as noted. The sample labeled “Si-
H” refers to the device with ND = 5x1014 cm-3 and 100 m contact spacing, with no passivating 
MM.15 
 
 
 
Table I. Summary of photovoltaic device performance for Al2O3-based devices with (lines 1-3) 
and without (line 4) passivating MM, PEDOT:PSS-only control device with the same process 
conditions as Al2O3 devices (line 5) and optimized PEDOT:PSS-only device (line 6) both with 
ND = 5 x 1014 cm-3. Results shown are averaged over 3-6 best devices of each type, with the 
standard deviation indicated. 
 
 
 
 
Sample  
Jsc 
(mA/cm2) 
Voc  
(V) 
FF 
(%) 
PCE 
(%) 
5 x 1013 
23(2) 
0.511(3) 
0.52(6) 
6.1(5) 
5 x 1014 
23(1) 
0.553(6) 
0.63(6) 
7.9(4) 
5 x 1015 
14(2) 
0.48(2) 
0.165(7) 
1.1(2) 
5 x 1014, 
Si-H 
18(1) 
0.535(7) 
0.47(9) 
4.6(6) 
PEDOT 
control 
20(3) 
0.503(6) 
0.60(7) 
5.9(8) 
PEDOT 
optimized 
21(1) 
0.51(2) 
0.67(5) 
7.4(1.0)16 
 
Supplementary Material to 
Aluminum oxide – n-Si field effect inversion layer solar cells with organic top contact 
 
 
A.S. Erickson,1 N.K. Kedem,1 A.E. Haj-Yahia,1  D. Cahen1 
1Dept. of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel 
 
For the case of a typical metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitor, low frequency 
capacitance-voltage (C-V) curves are generally characterized by reverse bias capacitance that 
saturates at values similar to the oxide capacitance, due to the response of minority carriers in the 
inversion layer.1 The frequency range, where this type of behavior is normally seen, depends on 
specific parameters of the system, but typical values for an inverted Si surface are up to tens of 
Hz. At higher frequency, the reverse bias capacitance typically saturates at low values due to the 
relatively long response time of the minority carriers. The highly inverted Si-Al2O3 interface, 
found in this work, gives rise to a saturation of the high frequency capacitance at reverse bias, 
similar to the behavior found only at low frequency for samples with a weaker inversion layer. 
This type of behavior indicates the existence of a uniform inversion layer at zero bias, which 
extends far beyond the gate electrode.1 This strong inversion layer, which acts as a good 
conductor, allows AC current to pass through an area much larger than the gate. The capacitance 
of the system is then governed by the capacitance of the depletion layer in that larger area, until 
it saturates at the oxide capacitance. Stronger inversion implies lower resistance in the inversion 
layer, due to the higher carrier density, which allows this typically low-frequency behavior to 
persist at higher frequencies. In figure 1, a C-V plot of a typical Au - Al2O3 - n-Si MOS device at 
various frequencies is presented. The capacitance at reverse bias is similar to the oxide17 
 
capacitance at relatively high frequencies of up to 100 kHz, and the impact of this highly 
conductive inversion layer is noticeable even at 1 MHz, in the slight upturn at reverse bias. 
Figure 2 shows the reverse bias capacitance at different frequencies. The reverse bias capacitance 
saturates at the oxide capacitance as high as 10 KHz. The fact that this type of behavior persists 
at such high frequency further supports our claim of strong inversion at the Si-Al2O3 interface. 
External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a 550 W tungsten-halogen lamp 
with a monochromator and a mechanical chopper to produce the incident light spectrum, which 
was calibrated to a silicon diode with known EQE. Current was measured using a lock-in 
amplifier locked-in to the frequency of the chopped light. For data shown here, the chopping 
frequency was 10 Hz, and no bias light or voltage were applied. Varying frequency and bias light 
intensity was found not to affect the results. Complementary reflectivity measurements were 
taken using a Jasco V-570 spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere. Samples of Si – Al2O3 
– PEDOT:PSS, with varying Al2O3 thickness and fixed 0.4 x 0.6 cm size, were loaded at an 
angle to minimize light reflected directly back to the source. 
 External quantum efficiency results for samples of roughly average efficiency are shown 
in figure 3(a), comparing a standard-process Al2O3 device to a device with PEDOT:PSS only 
(using optimized processing conditions, as described in the main text) to understand the source 
of improved photocurrent for Al2O3-based devices. In this case, both samples had a similar Jsc of 
21.1 mA/cm2 for the Al2O3 device, and 21.5 mA/cm2 for the PEDOT-only device. As is more 
clearly seen when the spectra are normalized to the maximum value (Fig 3(b)), the Al2O3 
provides enhancements to photocurrent collection primarily in the UV and IR regions.  
Results of reflectivity measurements are shown in figure 4. A reduction in reflectivity is 
seen below 500 nm for samples of Al2O3 thickness near the 25 nm used in this study,18 
 
corresponding to the region of enhanced quantum efficiency in the UV. Comparing to data for a 
much thicker Al2O3 layer of 45 nm shows that this arises from interference fringes. This raises 
the possibility of using a much thicker layer of Al2O3, perhaps by combining ALD with a higher 
throughput method, to take advantage of the antireflective properties. The Al2O3 layer was not 
found to influence the long wavelength reflectivity. 
The UV enhancement of the quantum efficiency likely results from reduced reflectivity in 
the presence of Al2O3, as demonstrated above. The improved IR response most likely arises from 
the wider depletion width expected for samples with a stronger inversion layer, which would 
improve collection of carriers generated in the bulk of the wafer. A higher efficiency Al2O3 
device of PCE = 8.4% and Jsc = 23.0 mA/cm2 was also measured and was found to show an 
even stronger IR and UV enhancement, as well as an overall higher EQE, but those data are not 
shown here, so as to emphasize that the differences are present also for average efficiency 
devices. The relatively low performance of the PEDOT:PSS – only device in the IR is typical for 
PEDOT:PSS – n-Si solar cells reported in the literature.2 We note that the significantly higher 
Voc values found for Al2O3 devices cannot be explained by the increase in EQE, and much more 
likely arise from the larger built-in voltage found in the inversion layer, induced by the high 
charge-density interface.  
 
References 
1. E.H. Nicollian and J.R. Brews, MOS Physics and Technology, Wiley-Interscience, New Jersey, 
(2003). 
2. Q. Liu, M. Ono, Z. Tang, R. Ishikawa, K. Ueno, and H. Shirai, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 183901 
(2012); M. Ono, Z. Tang, R. Ishikawa, T. Gotou, K. Ueno, and H. Shirai, Applied Physics 
Express 5, 032301 (2012).19 
 
 
Figure 1. Capacitance as a function of gate bias voltage, for different applied frequencies. All 
plots are corrected to exclude the effect of substrate and back contact resistance. 
 
Figure 2. Capacitance of the MOS devices at -0.5 V bias vs. measurement frequency, showing 
the saturation of capacitance at frequencies up to 10 KHz.20 
 
 
Figure 3. (a) External quantum efficiency, and (b) EQE normalized to the maximum value, for a 
standard device with Al2O3 and a control device with only n-Si – PEDOT:PSS, which was 
deposited using the optimized processing conditions. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) for 
these particular devices is also indicated.21 
 
Figure 4. Reflectivity measurements for samples of n-Si with varying thickness Al2O3 layers and 
200 nm PEDOT:PSS, and for n-Si – H without Al2O3, but with a 200 nm PEDOT:PSS, as a 
reference sample.