arXiv:0801.2831v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  18 Jan 2008
Quantum Spin Hall Eﬀect in Inverted Type II Semiconductors
Chaoxing Liu1,2, Taylor L. Hughes2, Xiao-Liang Qi2, Kang Wang3 and Shou-Cheng Zhang2
1 Center for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University,Beijing, 100084, China
2 Department of Physics, McCullough Building, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4045 and
3 Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1594
The quantum spin Hall (QSH) state is a topologically non-trivial state of quantum matter which
preserves time-reversal symmetry; it has an energy gap in the bulk, but topologically robust gapless
states at the edge. Recently, this novel eﬀect has been predicted and observed in HgTe quantum
wells[1, 2]. In this work we predict a similar eﬀect arising in Type-II semiconductor quantum wells
made from InAs/GaSb/AlSb. Because of a rare band alignment the quantum well band structure
exhibits an “inverted” phase similar to CdTe/HgTe quantum wells, which is a QSH state when
the Fermi level lies inside the gap.
Due to the asymmetric structure of this quantum well, the
eﬀects of inversion symmetry breaking and inter-layer charge transfer are essential. By standard
self-consistent calculations, we show that the QSH state persists when these corrections are included,
and a quantum phase transition between the normal insulator and the QSH phase can be electrically
tuned by the gate voltage.
PACS numbers:
Recently, a striking prediction of a quantum spin Hall
(QSH) insulator phase in HgTe/CdTe quantum wells[1]
was conﬁrmed in transport experiments[2]. The QSH in-
sulator phase is a topologically non-trivial state of matter
reminiscent of the integer quantum Hall eﬀect, but where
time-reversal symmetry is preserved instead of being bro-
ken by the large magnetic ﬁeld. The state is characterized
by a bulk charge-excitation gap and topologically pro-
tected helical edge states, where states of opposite spin
counter-propagate on each edge[3, 4, 5].Unfortunately,
high-quality HgTe/CdTe quantum wells are very special,
and only a few academic research groups have the precise
material control needed to carry out such delicate exper-
iments. We are therefore lead to search for other, more
conventional, materials that exhibit the QSH eﬀect.
In this work we introduce a new material with the
QSH phase, the InAs/GaSb/AlSb Type-II semiconduc-
tor quantum well in the inverted regime[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
We will show that this quantum well exhibits a subband
inversion transition as a function of layer thickness, sim-
ilar to the HgTe/CdTe system, and can be character-
ized by an eﬀective four-band model near the transition.
This model is similar to the model for HgTe/CdTe[1],
but contains terms describing the strong bulk inversion
asymmetry (BIA) and structural inversion asymmetry
(SIA). In fact, due to the unique band alignment of
InAs/GaSb/AlSb, the electron subband and the hole sub-
band are localized in diﬀerent quantum well layers. Addi-
tionally, the band alignment forces one to consider self-
consistent corrections[12, 13, 14] which we will discuss
below. Our results show that the asymmetric quantum
well, with strong built-in electric ﬁeld, can be electrically
tuned through the phase transition using front and back
gates. While this is of signiﬁcant fundamental interest, it
also allows one to construct a quantum spin Hall ﬁeld ef-
fect transistor (FET) that exhibits an insulating “OFF”
state with no leakage current, and a nearly dissipationless
“ON” state with non-zero conductance via the topologi-
cal edge states.
The quantum well structures in which we are inter-
ested are asymmetric with AlSb/InAs/GaSb/AlSb lay-
ers grown as shown in Fig. 1. This is an unusual quan-
tum well system due to the alignment of the conduc-
tion and valence band edges of InAs and GaSb.
The
valence band edge of GaSb is 0.15 eV higher than the
conduction band edge of the InAs layer. The AlSb lay-
ers serve as conﬁning outer barriers. The “conduction”
subbands are localized in the InAs layer while the “va-
lence” subbands are localized in the GaSb layer as il-
lustrated in Fig. 1 (a). In this work we will focus on
the regime where the lowest electron and hole subbands
E1, H1, which are derived from the s-like conduction and
p-like heavy-hole bands respectively, are nearly degener-
ate, and all other subbands are well-separated in energy.
When the quantum well thickness is increased the energy
of the E1 (H1) band edge is decreasing (increasing). At
some critical thickness a level crossing occurs between
E1 and H1, after which the band edge of E1 sinks below
that of H1, putting the system into the inverted regime
of Type-II quantum wells. Since the H1 band disperses
downwards and the E1 band disperses upwards, the in-
version of the band sequence leads to a crossing of the two
bands, see Fig. 1 (b). Historically, the inverted regime of
InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum wells was described as a semi-
metal without a gap[6]. However, Ref. [7] ﬁrst pointed
out that due to the mixing between E1 and H1, a small
gap (Eg in Fig 1 (b)) is generally opened, leading to bulk
insulating behavior.
This hybridization gap was later
demonstrated in experiments[8, 9]. Therefore, just like
in the HgTe/CdTe quantum wells, the inverted regime
of InAs/GaSb quantum wells should be a topologically
non-trivial QSH phase protected by the bulk gap.
This seemingly simple conclusion is complicated by the
unique features of type II quantum wells: the electron-
subband and hole-subband are separated in two diﬀerent
layers. There are several separate consequences of this2
InAs
0.36eV
GaSb
0.7eV
Barrier
AlSb
1.6eV
Barrier
AlSb
1.6eV
E1
H1
Front 
gate
Vf
Back 
gate
Vb
(a)
k
E
E1
H1
Eg
(b)
FIG. 1: (a) Band gap and band oﬀset diagram for asymmetric
AlSb/InAs/GaSb quantum wells. The left AlSb barrier layer
is connected to a front gate while the right barrier is connected
to a back gate. The E1 subband is localized in the InAs layer
and H1 is localized in the GaSb layer. Outer AlSb barriers
provide an overall conﬁning potential for electron and hole
states. (b) Schematic band structure diagram. The dashed
line shows the crossing of the E1 and H1 states in the inverted
regime, and due to the hybridization between E1 and H1, the
gap Eg appears.
fact. First, the hybridization between E1 and H1 is re-
duced, but this is just a quantitative correction. Second,
since there is no inversion symmetry in the quantum well
growth direction, SIA terms may be large enough to com-
pete with the reduced hybridization. In addition, BIA
may also play a role for this system.
Therefore, both
SIA and BIA must be included properly to make a cor-
rect prediction, while in HgTe/CdTe quantum wells these
two types of terms were ignored because BIA terms are
small when compared with the hybridization, and the
quantum well was symmetric which minimizes SIA. Fi-
nally, since the electron and hole subbands lie in two
diﬀerent layers, there is an automatic charge transfer be-
tween the layers which yields a coexistence of p-type and
n-type carriers. Consequently, a self-consistent treatment
of Coloumb energy is necessary to account for this eﬀect.
In the following, we will discuss all of these issues and
conclude that the QSH phase exists in an experimentally
viable parameter range.
The materials in these quantum wells have the zinc-
blende lattice structure and direct gaps near the Γ
point and are thus well-described by the 8-band Kane
model[15]. We will construct an eﬀective 4-band model
using the same envelope function approximation proce-
dure as the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang (BHZ) model[1]; al-
beit a more complex one due to the SIA and BIA terms.
The Hamiltonian naturally separates into three distinct
parts
H = H0 + HBIA + HSIA.
(1)
In the basis {|E1+⟩, |H1+⟩, |E1−⟩, |H1−⟩}, and keeping
terms only up to quadratic powers of k, we have
H0 = ǫ(k)I4×4 +



M(k)
Ak+
0
0
Ak−
−M(k)
0
0
0
0
M(k)
−Ak−
0
0
−Ak+ −M(k)


(2)
where I4×4 is the 4 × 4 identity matrix, M(k) = M0 +
M2k2 and ǫ(k) = C0 + C2k2. This is simply the Hamil-
tonian used by BHZ. The zinc-blende structure has two
diﬀerent atoms in each unit cell, which breaks the bulk
inversion symmetry and leads to additional terms in the
bulk Hamiltonian[16]. When projected onto the lowest
subbands the BIA terms are
HBIA =



0
0
∆ek+
−∆0
0
0
∆0
∆hk−
∆ek−
∆0
0
0
−∆0
∆hk+
0
0


.
(3)
Finally the SIA term reads
HSIA =



0
0 iξek−0
0
0
0
0
−iξ∗
ek+ 0
0
0
0
0
0
0


.
(4)
Here we recognize the SIA term as the electron k-linear
Rashba term; the heavy-hole k-cubic Rashba term is ne-
glected. The parameters ∆h, ∆e, ∆0, ξe depend on the
quantum well geometry.
Now we address, from pure band structure considera-
tions, whether or not a QSH phase exists in this model.
Without HBIA and HSIA the Hamiltonian is block diag-
onal and each block is exactly a massive Dirac Hamilto-
nian in (2+1)d. By itself, each block breaks time-reversal
symmetry, but the two 2×2 blocks are time-reversal part-
ners so that the combined system remains time-reversal
invariant.
As mentioned, this is the pure BHZ model
and from their argument we know that there is a topo-
logical phase transition signalled by the gap closing con-
dition M0 = 0, and the system is in QSH phase when
M0/M2 < 0. When HBIA and HSIA terms are included,
the two blocks of H0 are coupled together and the anal-
ysis in BHZ model does not directly apply. However, the
QSH phase is a topological phase of matter protected
by the band gap[3, 4, 5].
In other words, if we start
from the Hamiltonian H0 in the QSH phase and turn on
HBIA and HSIA adiabatically, the system will remain
in the QSH phase as long as the energy gap between
E1 and H1 remains ﬁnite. With realistic parameters for
an InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum well obtained from the 8-
band Kane model, the adiabatic connection between the
inversion-symmetric Hamiltonian H0 and the full Hamil-
tonian H was veriﬁed for the proper parameter regime,3
FIG. 2:
The energy dispersions of Hamiltonian (1) on a
cylindrical geometry with open boundary conditions along
the y-direction and periodic boundary conditions along the
x-direction.
(a) The dispersion for the quantum well with
GaSb layer thickness d1 = 10nm and InAs layer thickness
d2 = 8.1nm, which is a normal insulator with no edge states.
(b) The dispersion for d1 = d2 = 10nm quantum well which is
a QSH insulator with one pair of edge states. A tight-binding
regularization with lattice constant a = 20˚A is used in this
calculation.
which supports the existence of a QSH phase in this sys-
tem. Though the BIA and SIA terms do not destroy the
QSH phase, they do modify the quantum phase transition
between the QSH phase and normal insulator (NI). The
transition (gap-closing) will generically occur at ﬁnite-k
rather than at the Γ point, and a nodal region between
QSH and NI phases can possibly appear in the phase
diagram[17, 18, 19, 20].
A more direct way of identifying the QSH phase is
to study the edge state spectrum. There are always an
odd number of Kramers’s pairs of edge states conﬁned on
the boundary of a QSH insulator, and an even number
pairs (possibly zero) for the boundary of the NI phase.
The edge state energy spectrum of the eﬀective model
(1) can be obtained by solving this model with a simple
tight-binding regularization in a cylindrical geometry, the
result of which is shown in Fig. 2. We ﬁnd one Kramers’s
pair of edge states with opposite spin on each edge for
the QSH side, and no edge states for the NI side. This
again conﬁrms the existence of QSH phase in this model.
To study the InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum well system
more systematically and quantitatively, we conﬁrm the
above analysis by numerically solving the realistic 8-band
Kane model. In the inverted regime, there exists an in-
trinsic charge transfer between the InAs layer and GaSb
layer. Therefore, we need to take into account the built-
in electric ﬁeld. The energy dispersions for diﬀerent well
thicknesses are shown in Fig. 3 (a)-(c), where we ﬁx the
GaSb layer thickness d1 = 10nm and vary the thickness
of InAs layer d2. The system is gapped for a generic value
of d2. However, at a critical thickness d2c = 9nm (Fig 3
(b)) a crossing at ﬁnite k occurs between the subbands
E1 and H1, which marks the phase transition point be-
tween the QSH and NI phases. According to the above
adiabatic continuity argument, we know that the quan-
tum well is in a NI state for d2 < d2c (Fig. 3 (a)) and
FIG. 3: (a)-(c) The energy dispersions calculated from the 8-
band Kane model for three well conﬁgurations, where d1 and
d2 are the thickness of GaSb layer and InAs layer, respectively.
(d) The energy gap variation in d1 −d2 plane, where brighter
colors represent a smaller gap. A, B and C on the dashed blue
line indicate respectively the place where (a), (b) and (c) are
plotted. NI and QSH denote the phases in the corresponding
region of parameter space.
QSH state for d2 > d2c (Fig. 3 (c)). As the band in-
version is only determined by the relative positions of
E1 and H1, the quantum wells with other values of d1
behave essentially the same. As the QSH phase and NI
phase are always separated by a gap closing point, we
can determine the d1 −d2 phase diagram via the energy
gap. As shown in Fig. 3 (d), two gapped regimes (in
red) are separated by a critical line (brightly colored) in
the d1, d2 plane. The quantum well conﬁgurations shown
in Figs. 3 (a), (b) and (c) are indicated by points A, B
and C, respectively. Due to the adiabatic continuity, an
entire connected gapped region in the phase diagram is
in the NI (QSH) phase once one point in it is conﬁrmed
to be in this phase. Since Fig. 3 (a) corresponds to the
NI phase and (c) the QSH phase, we identify the right
side of the diagram as the QSH regime and the left side
as the NI regime.
One advantage of the InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum wells
is that due to the large built-in electric ﬁeld, the QSH-
NI phase transition can be easily tuned by external gate
voltages. When we tune the gate voltage, both the band
structure and the Fermi level are adjusted simultane-
ously.
Since the QSH eﬀect can only occur when the
Fermi level lies in the gap, we need two gates in order
to independently tune the relative position between the
E1 and H1 band edges and the Fermi level.
In fact,
such a dual-gate geometry has already been realized ex-
perimentally in InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum wells[10]. In
the present work, we performed a self-consistent Poisson-
Schrodinger type calculation[12, 13, 14] for such a dual-
gate geometry shown in Fig. 1 (a). To simplify the cal-
culation, we take the thickness of the AlSb barrier layers
to be much smaller than that in realistic experiments,
which has a negligible eﬀect in the quantum well except
for a rescaling of Vf and Vb. We also neglect the weak ef-4
fects of subband anisotropy and intrinsic donor defects at
the InAs/GaSb interface. None of these simpliﬁcations
should aﬀect our results qualitatively.
For ﬁxed d1 = d2 = 10 nm we explored the Vf −Vb
phase diagram as shown in Fig. 4. There are six distinct
regions in the ﬁgure. The dotted black line shows the gap
closing transition between the inverted and non-inverted
regimes. In parameter regions I,II,III the system has an
inverted band structure, but only region II is in the QSH
phase with the Fermi level tuned inside the bulk gap. Re-
gion I (III) is described by the same Hamiltonian as the
QSH phase, but with ﬁnite hole (electron) doping. In the
same way, region V is the NI phase and IV, VI are the
corresponding p-doped and n-doped normal semiconduc-
tors. Thus, by tuning Vf and Vb to the correct range, one
can easily get the phase transition between QSH phase
II and NI phase V.
I
Vf(V)
Vb(V)
II
III
IV
V
VI
FIG. 4: The phase diagram for diﬀerent front (Vf) and back
(Vb) gate voltages. Regions I,II,III are in the inverted regime,
in which the striped region II is the QSH phase with Fermi-
level in the bulk gap, and I, III are the p-doped and n-doped
inverted system. Regions IV,V,VI are in the normal regime,
in which the striped region V is the NI phase with Fermi
level in the bulk gap, and IV, VI are the p-doped and n-
doped normal semiconductors. The well conﬁguration is set
as d1 = d2 = 10nm, and the AlSb barrier thickness is taken
30nm on each side in the self-consistent calculation. Vf and
Vb are deﬁned with respect to the Fermi level in the quantum
well.
Compared to the similar proposal of a gate-induced
phase transition in asymmetric HgTe/CdTe quantum
wells[21], the InAs/GaSb/AlSb quantum well is much
more sensitive to the gate voltage, which makes it much
easier to realize such a transition experimentally. Physi-
cally, this comes from the fact that the electron and hole
wavefunctions are centered in separate layers, so that the
eﬀect of the gate voltage on them is highly asymmetric.
This simple mechanism allows us to investigate the quan-
tum phase transition from the NI to the QSH state in-
situ, through the continuous variation of the gate volt-
age, rather than the discrete variation of the quantum
well thickness.
It is also useful for developing a QSH
FET. The FET is in an ‘OFF’ state when the Fermi
level lies inside the normal insulating gap. Then, by ad-
justing the gate voltages the FET can be ﬂipped to the
‘ON’ state by passing through the transition to the QSH
phase, where the current is carried only by the dissipa-
tionless edge states. This simple device can be operated
with reasonable voltages as seen in Fig. 4 but would be
more promising if one could enlarge the bulk insulating
gap to support room temperature operation.
In conclusion, we propose that the QSH state can be re-
alized in InAs/GaSb quantum wells. We presented both
simple arguments based on eﬀective model and realistic
self-consistent calculations. In addition we have proposed
an experimental setup to electrically control the quantum
phase transition from the normal insulator to the QSH
phase. This principle could be used to construct a QSH
FET device with minimal dissipation.
We would like to thank B. F. Zhu for the useful
discussion.
This work is supported by the NSF un-
der grant numbers DMR-0342832, the US Department
of Energy, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences under con-
tract DE-AC03-76SF00515 and by the Focus Center Re-
search Program (FCRP) Center on Functional Engi-
neered Nanoarchitectonics (FENA). CXL acknowledges
the support of China Scholarship Council, the NSF of
China (Grant No.10774086, 10574076), and the Program
of Basic Research Development of China (Grant No.
2006CB921500).
[1] B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.C. Zhang, Science
314, 1757 (2006).
[2] M. Konig, S. Wiedmann, C. Brune, A. Roth, H. Buh-
mann, L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang,
Science 318, 766 (2007).
[3] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 226801
(2005).
[4] C. J. Wu, B. A. Bernevig, and S. C. Zhang, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96, 106401 (2006).
[5] C. Xu and J. Moore, Phys. Rev. B 73, 045322 (2006).
[6] L. L. Chang and L. Esaki, Surf. Sci. 98, 70 (1980).
[7] M. Altarelli, Phys. Rev. B 28, 842 (1983).
[8] M. J. Yang, C. H. Yang, B. R. Bennett, and B. V.
Shanabrook, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4613 (1997).
[9] M. Lakrimi, S. Khym, R. J. Nicholas, D. M. Symons,
F. M. Peeters, N. J. Mason, and P. J. Walker, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 3034 (1997).
[10] L. J. Cooper, N. K. Patel, V. Drouot, E. H. Linﬁeld,
D. A. Ritchie, and M. Pepper, Phys. Rev. B 57, 11915
(1998).5
[11] E. Halvorsen, Y. Galperin, and K. A. Chao, Phys. Rev.
B 61, 16743 (2000).
[12] I. Lapushkin, A. Zakharova, S. T. Yen, and K. A. Chao,
J. Phys: Condens. Matter 16, 4677 (2004).
[13] I. Semenikhin, A. Zakharova, K. Nilsson, and K. A. Chao,
Phys. Rev. B 76, 035335 (2007).
[14] Y. Naveh and B. Laikhtman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 900
(1996).
[15] E.O. Kane, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1, 249 (1957).
[16] R.
Winkler,
Spin-Orbit
Coupling
Eﬀects
in
Two-
Dimensional Electron and Hole Systems (Springer Tracts
in Modern Physics, 2003).
[17] S. Murakami, S. Iso, Y. Avishai, M. Onoda, and N. Na-
gaosa, Physical Review B 76, 205304 (2007).
[18] X. Dai, T. L. Hughes, X.-L. Qi, Z. Fang, and S.-C. Zhang,
arXiv:0705.1516, to be published on Phys. Rev. B.
[19] M. Koenig, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, T. L.
Hughes,
C.-X.
Liu,
X.-L.
Qi,
and
S.-C.
Zhang,
arXiv:0801.0901 (2008).
[20] T. L. Hughes, C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, in
preparation.
[21] W. Yang, K. Chang, and S. C. Zhang, arXiv:0711.1900.