Magnetic domains without domain walls: a unique effect of He+ ion bombardment in 
ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers. 
Łukasz Frąckowiak1, Piotr Kuświk1, Gabriel David Chaves-O’Flynn1, Maciej Urbaniak1, 
Michał Matczak2, Andrzej Maziewski2, Meike Reginka3, Arno Ehresmann3, and 
Feliks Stobiecki1 
 
1 Institute of Molecular Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland  
2 Faculty of Physics, University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland 
3 Institute of Physics and Center for Interdisciplinary Nanostructure Science and 
Technology (CINSaT), University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany  
 
Abstract 
 
We show that it is possible to engineer magnetic multi-domain configurations without 
domain walls in a prototypical rare earth/transition metal ferrimagnet using keV He+ ion 
bombardment. We additionally shown that these patterns display a particularly stable 
magnetic configuration due to a deep minimum in the free energy of the system which is 
caused by flux closure and the corresponding reduction of the magnetostatic part of the 
total free energy. This is possible because light-ion bombardment differently affects an 
elements relative contribution to the effective properties of the ferrimagnet. The impact of 
bombardment is stronger for rare earth elements. Therefore, it is possible to influence the 
relative contributions of the two magnetic subsystems in a controlled manner. The 
selection of material system and the use of light-ion bombardment open a route to engineer 
domain patterns in continuous magnetic films much smaller than what is currently 
considered possible.  
 
Introduction 
 
The ability to create lateral magnetic domain patterns is at the heart of a manifold of 
applications. Their use in magnetic mass memories [1–4] is absolutely straightforward but 
also in other areas, such as magnonics [5,6], or for the formation of defined domain 
patterns used for magnetophoresis in lab-on-a-chip devices  [7–11] magnetic domain 
engineering forms a basic technology. For such applications, it is common to use 
ferromagnetic layers. In these materials, magnetic domains are uniformly magnetized 
regions, in which the effective magnetization points in a definite direction. Naturally 
occurring domain patterns are formed by free energy minimization, usually as a 
compromise between exchange, anisotropy and stray field energy terms [5,7,12,13]. The 
domains are separated by domain walls (DWs) which are the transition regions where the 
magnetic moment reorients from the direction within the first domain to the direction 
within the second. DW geometries depend on the ratio between the exchange coupling and 
the anisotropy constants and typically consist of a narrow core and comparably wide 
tails [12]. Their widths constitute the natural size limit for individual domains. Therefore, 
the lateral DW widths also constitute the critical dimension for magnetic domain 
engineering in continuous layers. Domain patterns can be engineered by local modification 
of magnetic properties such as the coercive field (HC)  [14–17] or the exchange bias 
coupling of systems composed of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic layers  [18–21]. In 
the past this has been achieved, e.g., by light-ion bombardment through masks  [18–
20,22,23], by focused ion beams  [24–27], by direct laser writing [28], or by thermally 
assisted scanning probe lithography [29]. Walls between magnetic domains engineered by 
these methods are usually non-symmetric [30] with respect to their center due to different 
anisotropies on the two sides of the wall. However, even those methods will not be able to 
engineer domains of lateral dimensions below the respective (average) DW widths. Here 
we describe a ferrimagnetic material system in combination with a method to engineermagnetic domain patterns without lateral DWs. This unique combination promises 
magnetic domains in continuous layer systems of dimensions well below the typical 
ferromagnetic DW widths.  
The fundamental physics of magnetic domain formation in ferrimagnetic films is similar to 
the one in ferromagnetic films [12], the occurrence of two magnetic moment subsystems, 
however, results in more involved domain formation effects. Layer systems consisting of 
rare earth (RE) transition metal (TM) alloyed layers, with alternating stoichiometric 
domination of RE (RE+) or TM (TM+) will contain interfacial DWs at saturation [31–37]  
(Fig.1a). This peculiar situation is possible because parallel effective magnetizations (black 
arrows in Fig. 1) in the RE+ and TM+ layers correspond to antiparallel magnetic moments 
of the magnetic subsystems (red and blue arrows in Fig. 1) of the same type (RE or TM) in 
the two homogeneous different layers  [34]. Recently Li and coworkers investigated RE-
TM alloy films with inhomogeneous concentrations of Tb [38] [Li2016] whose 
magnetization reversal characteristics have also been explained by the existence of two 
nanoscale amorphous phases in a TbFeCo film with differing Tb concentration. 
Here, we demonstrate that 10 keV He+ ion bombardment allows to modify the magnetic 
properties of ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers that exhibit perpendicular magnetic 
anisotropy [39–43]. In particular, we show that with increasing dose of He+ ions the Tb 
magnetization decreases much stronger than the Co one. This finding opens a way to 
pattern RE+ ferrimagnetic films by light-ion bombardment through a mask or by light-ion 
beam writing to locally reverse the domination from RE+ to TM+ and therefore engineer 
magnetic domains without DWs in the two magnetic subsystems (Fig. 1b). Using this 
patterning technique, we fabricate a laterally periodic domain pattern consisting of a lattice 
of low HC TM+ squares embedded in a high HC RE+ grid (later referred to as matrix).  
 
Results and discussion 
The subjects of our investigations are Tb/Co multilayers displaying, for small sublayer 
thicknesses, magnetic properties similar to amorphous Co-Tb alloy films [39–43]. In order 
to determine the influence of the 10 keV He+ ion bombardment on the properties of the 
(Tb/Co)6 multilayers as a function of the thickness ratio between Co and Tb layers, i.e. as a 
function of the effective multilayer composition a particular layer system was deposited. In 
this layer system, the nominal thicknesses of the Co sublayers were fixed at tCo = 0.66 nm 
and the Tb sublayers were deposited as wedges with thicknesses  0  tTb  2 nm. The 
sample was bombarded with the two different He+-ion doses D of 1x1015 and 3x1015 
ions/cm² (see description in methods). The characterization of magnetic properties was 
performed using a Magnetooptical Kerr Effect (MOKE) magnetometer in polar 
configuration with a probing-light wavelength of 640 nm. Fig. 2 shows changes of the 
coercive field as a function of the Tb sublayer thickness (HC(tTb)) for an unbombarded area 
and two areas bombarded with D = 11015 He+/cm2 and D = 31015 He+/cm2. The 
singularities in the curves HC(tTb;D) correspond to the Tb layer thicknesses tTb and the 
associated effective Tb concentration cTb at which the magnetic moments of Co and Tb 
compensate each other. It is easily seen that these values increase with increasing D.  
Note that the hysteresis loops for systems with Tb and Co domination have opposite 
orientations. This occurs because for the light wavelength used in the MOKE set up the Co 
magnetic subsystem determines the sign of the magnetooptical signal; the Co magnetic 
moments are parallel to the net magnetization in Co dominated films, and antiparallel in Tb 
dominated films [39,44–46]. After ion bombardment with D = 11015 He+/cm2 (Fig. 2c), 
the hysteresis loop still has an orientation indicating the dominance of the Tb magnetic 
subsystem; however, HC has a higher value than in the as-deposited state. Increasing D to 
31015 He+/cm² (Fig. 2d) results in a modification of the layer system such that the Co 
magnetic subsystem starts to dominate for Tb layer thicknesses tTb  1.6 nm, i.e. the Tb 
magnetic subsystem is modified more than the Co one by the He+-ion bombardment. Thisis an important result, paving the way for an engineering of magnetic patterns without 
DWs. 
To prove such a possibility, we performed local He+ ion bombardment through a resist 
mask with two doses D = 11015 He+/cm2 and D = 31015 He+/cm2 (see methods and 
supplementary material) for a selected Tb sublayer thickness of 1.1 nm and studied the 
magnetization reversal of the magnetically patterned (Tb-1.1nm/Co-0.66nm)6 multilayer . 
For each dose four 1x1mm² areas were patterned on the same sample with periodically 
arranged squares of side lengths a = 3, 12.5, 25, and 100 m and distances between the 
centers of neighboring squares of 2a (see Fig. S1 in supplementary materials). The squares 
have been modified by ion bombardment, the rest of the sample (matrix) remained 
unchanged.  
Full and minor P-MOKE hysteresis loops for both doses and in all patterned areas are 
shown in Figs. 3a, 3b, the magnetic moment configurations of the two magnetic 
subsystems of the ferrimagnet corresponding to the states 1 - 4 observed in the loops are 
sketched in Figs. 3e and 3f. Additional reference MOKE-measurements were performed on 
11 mm2 square areas bombarded with D = 11015 He+/cm2 and D = 31015 He+/cm2, as 
well as for an area of the same size, protected by the resist mask (Figs. 3c, 3d). Note that 
the dimensions of the reference areas were much larger than the laser spot (diameter 0.3 
mm) used for MOKE characterization. Therefore, the reference loops are not affected by 
the border regions between bombarded and not bombarded areas. The situation is different 
for the patterned periodic square lattices where hysteresis loops are approximately the 
superposition of the loops obtained for the reference areas. The P-MOKE signal ratio 
corresponding to magnetization reversal of the squares and matrix is equal to the ratio of 
the areas of these regions, which is 1/3. Only for the largest squares the observed ratio is 
not exactly 1/3 as for these measurements the size of the individual squares is close to the 
MOKE laser spot; in consequence the signal does not fully average over several squares 
and depends on the precise position of the laser spot with respect to the large squares. A 
comparably small dependence of the switching fields (HS) on the square size parameter a is 
observed for switching between states 2→3 and between 4→1, whereas essentially no 
dependence is observed for the switching between states 3→4 and 1→2 (Figs. 3a and b)). 
This indicates a relatively weak interaction between the ion-modified regions and the 
matrix and is caused by weak magnetostatic interactions that result from the low saturation 
magnetization (MS) of the studied films and their small thicknesses. Exchange coupling at 
the borders between squares and matrix contributes weakly to the above interaction 
because of the small interaction surface (the film thickness multiplied by the total 
perimeter lengths of all the squares). 
Magnetization reversal in a RE+ matrix with embedded RE+ squares  
The loops corresponding to this case are displayed in Fig. 3a), the magnetic moment 
configurations of the two magnetic subsystems and the effective magnetizations for the 
states 1 – 4 are shown in Fig. 3e). Switching fields indicate a dependence on the square 
dimensions only in the magnetization reversal between states 2→3 and 4→1 (Fig. 3a). 
Hereinafter, the switching fields HS
if, related to the transition between specific states will 
be described using superscripts identifying the initial (i) and final (f) states, e.g., for D = 
11015 He+/cm2 (Fig. 3a) HS
23 and HS
41 corresponds to the magnetization reversal of areas 
(squares) subjected to ion bombardment. At this dose D, both the matrix and the squares 
show the dominance of the magnetic moments of the Tb magnetic subsystem. Therefore, 
during the transition between states 2→3 and 4→1 the reversals of squares correspond to 
an annihilation of domains and their corresponding DWs (cf. inset in Fig. 3e). Since the 
DW energy released by these processes is proportional to the wall interface area, this 
reduction of HS
23 (HS
41) with decreasing a is understandable. Additionally, it is obvious 
that a reduction of a produces a broadening of the transition region for the switching fieldsHS
23 and HS
41. This is related to the statistical variation of HS among the squares (see 
movie in supplementary materials). The distribution of switching fields for squares reflects 
local (lateral) fluctuations of magnetic properties (mainly anisotropy and exchange 
constants, i.e., parameters determining the energy of DWs) [12]. As the magnetization 
reversal processes 2→3 and 4→1 correspond to the annihilation of domains and DWs 
processes 1→2 and 3→4 are related to their creation (Fig. 3e). As the processes 1→2 and 
3→4 take place through propagation of a DW in the matrix (in this case the matrix can be 
treated as a continuous layer [Suppl. Mat]) the magnetization reversal takes place in a very 
narrow magnetic field range and the values of HS
12 and HS
34 are equal to the field HC of the 
matrix (Fig. 3a, 3c). Moreover, they are practically independent of a. 
The minor loop shift (Hmls) (Fig. 3a), measured from the negative saturation field, show 
positive values for D = 11015 He+/cm2, revealing a ferromagnetic interaction between the 
modified areas and the matrix  [47]. This is consistent with the tendency to eliminate 
antiparallel orientations of the magnetization between the magnetic subsystems of the same 
type (Co and Tb) on opposite sides of the border between squares and matrix  [38], i.e. to 
annihilation of DWs.  
The magnetization reversal of the magnetically textured ferrimagnetic films (Fig. 3a), in 
which RE+ areas (squares) are embedded in a RE+ matrix with different HS, practically 
does not deviate from a situation in which the ferrimagnetic film would be replaced by a 
ferromagnetic one. However, the situation changes when the modified areas and the matrix 
differ not only in HS but also in magnetic subsystem domination. 
Magnetization reversal in a RE+ matrix with embedded TM+ squares  
The loops corresponding to this case are displayed in Fig. 3b, the magnetic moment 
configurations of the two magnetic subsystems and the effective magnetizations for the 
states 1 – 4 are shown in Fig. 3f. Fig. 3b shows measurements in a system for which the 
ion bombarded areas have lower HS and are TM+, while the matrix has a higher HS and is 
RE+. In this case, 1→2 and 3→4 magnetization reversals occur in the square areas 
modified by ion bombardment. In states 1 and 3 (at saturation), the effective 
magnetizations of squares and matrix are both oriented in the direction of the magnetic 
field; at the same time, the magnetizations of each magnetic subsystem (Co and Tb) 
change to the antiparallel direction across the borders between squares and matrix (Figs. 
3f, 4g). Therefore, in states 1 and 3, DWs exist at the borders of the squares. At fields HS
12 
and HS
34, the squares reverse (the effective magnetizations of squares and matrix are now 
antiparallel to each other) and the DWs in the magnetic subsystems are annihilated. To 
corroborate this conclusion micromagnetic simulations have been carried out to determine 
the magnetic configuration of the Co and Tb subsystems in the transition area between 
RE+ and TM+ region. The results are shown in Fig. 4 and will be discussed below. 
The comparison of the magnetic configurations of states 1 (3) and 2 (4) (Fig. 3b, 3f) 
indicates that, at remanence, states 2 and 4 are energetically more favorable than states 1 
and 3. This is caused both by a reduction of the magnetostatic energy (the effective 
magnetization in the squares is antiparallel to that of the matrix) and the annihilation of 
DWs. As a result, processes 1→2 and 3→4 involve a reduction of the free energy in the 
system; while the opposite processes are accompanied by an increase (2→1 and 4→3, seen 
in the minor loops). Although the individual squares reverse independently, the values HS
12 
and HS
34 are close to the HC value of the modified reference area (Fig. 3b, 3d) and show a 
narrow distribution, while HS
21 and HS
43the transition 43 is not shown in Fig. 3b) 
are greater than the HC of the reference area and have large spread (Fig. 3g). The 
influence of a on the above-mentioned switching fields is stronger for smaller a (or for 
greater combined length of all DWs). In contrast to the reversal process presented in Fig. 
3a, the shift of minor loops seen in Fig. 3b is negative, indicating an antiferromagnetic 
coupling between the TM+ squares and the RE+ matrix. However, the origin of thesebehaviors is the same in both cases and it is related to the elimination of the antiparallel 
configuration of magnetization in the Co and Tb magnetic subsystems (annihilation of 
DWs). The broadening of the distribution of HS
21 and HS
43 as a is reduced can be attributed 
to the spatial distribution of magnetic properties due to deposition and ion bombardment 
through resist  [48–50]. 
To support qualitatively our interpretation of the experimental data, we have performed 
micromagnetic simulations using the publicly available OOMMF package [51] without any 
additional extensions. Details of simulations are described in Methods. A typical full loop 
and a minor loop for the patterned strip (described in methods) are shown in Fig. 4a. The 
full loop is a two-step hysteresis with intermediate states similar to those described in the 
discussion of Fig. 3b. Note that in Fig. 3b the dependence of the P-MOKE signal (strongly 
dominated by the magnetic Co subsystem) on the magnetic field and in Fig. 4a the one of 
the effective magnetization is shown. State 1 corresponds to magnetic saturation in 
negative field where the effective moments in both RE+ and TM+ regions are aligned 
parallel to the field (Fig. 4f), while for state 2 the effective moment in the bombarded area 
is opposite to that of the matrix (Fig. 4h). Close-up views of these configurations are 
shown in Figs. 4e and 4g. These transversal cross-sections show the difference between the 
two states: in state 1 the effective magnetization is negative everywhere but at the interface 
the magnetization rotates in each magnetic subsystem(i.e., the DWs are present) while; 
state 2 does not contain a DW although the two regions have opposite effective 
magnetizations. These two images support the key finding of our paper, namely that the 
hybrid RE+/TM+ ferrimagnetic layered system can be patterned by keV He-ion 
bombardment allowing multi-domains without DWs (stage 1). It is worth noting that, due 
to the strong antiferromagnetic interaction between the Co and the Tb magnetic 
subsystems, the spin structure of 
DWs is similar to the one found in 
antiferromagnets [52,53]. 
Having shown that in ferrimagnetic films consisting of TM+ areas embedded in an RE+ 
matrix the antiparallel configuration of the effective magnetization can exist without DWs 
at the RE+/TM+ interfaces, now we show that at the field induced transition between states 
1 and 2 the reduction in anisotropy energy and exchange energy is accompanied by a 
reduction of the magnetostatic energy. Overall, the flux closure is achieved with the 
annihilation of the DW. Figs. 4b-d show the anisotropy, magnetostatic and exchange 
energies as a function of field for the down sweep branch of the hysteresis loop. In state 2, 
which occupies the middle region of this graph (-10 kOe < H < -1 kOe), we see that due to 
annihilation of the DWs the exchange and sum of anisotropy and magnetostatic energies 
are reduced. It is also apparent that the magnetostatic energy in state 2 is generally lower 
than in state 1. Therefore, such magnetic configuration is very stable and is characterized 
by a deep free energy minimum, which explains the strong negative value of Hmls observed 
both in the experiment (Fig. 3b) and simulations (Fig. 4a). This confirms that it is possible 
to achieve flux closure in the absence of DWs which explains why the observed unique 
features are particularly stable and energetically advantageous. 
 
Summary 
It has been shown that in a prototypical rare earth (RE)/transition metal (TM) layered 
ferrimagnetic material system magnetic domains can be engineered by 10 keV He+ ion 
bombardment without DWs between the patterns. It has been shown that these patterns 
display a particularly stable magnetic configuration due to a deep minimum in the free 
energy of the system which is caused by flux closure and the corresponding reduction of 
the magnetostatic energy part of the total free energy. As a result, a much larger magnetic 
field is required to annihilate such a magnetic pattern than to create it. The fundamental 
effect used for engineering of such domains without DWs is the observation that the rare 
earth contribution to the effective properties of the ferrimagnetic multilayers is moresensitive to keV light-ion bombardment as compared to the contribution of the transition 
metal. Therefore, this technique can be used in this material system to achieve a steering of 
the relative contributions of the two magnetic subsystems in a controlled manner. Thus, 
starting with magnetic Co/Tb multilayers where the Tb magnetization dominates and using 
ion bombardment, we created magnetic patterns where areas with Co magnetic moment 
density domination and small coercive fields were embedded in the matrix that retained the 
magnetic properties of the as-deposited system.  
 
Methods 
Samples deposition. The (Tb-wedge 0-2nm/Co-0.66nm)6 and (Tb-1.1nm/Co-0.66nm)6 
layered systems were deposited from elemental targets using magnetron sputtering in an 
ultra-high vacuum chamber (base pressure 10−9 mbar) with an argon pressure of 10−3 mbar 
on 20x20 mm2 naturally oxidized Si(100) substrates coated with a Ti-4 nm/Au-30 nm 
buffer layer  [39]. The wedge-shaped sublayers were produced using a linear shutter. The 
growth of the films was carried out at RT and, in contrast to our previous 
investigations  [39], without magnetic field. To prevent oxidation of samples an additional 
5 nm thick Au protective layer is used.  
 
Ion bombardment.  
Choice of Tb thickness in Co/Tb multilayers designed for magnetic patterning.  
The multilayer Si/Ti-4nm/Au-30nm/(Tb-wedge 0-2nm/Co-0.66nm)6/Au-5nm sample was 
subjected to two different doses (D = 11015 and D = 5x1015 He+/cm2) of He+ ions. For 
both D values, a strip of 2mm width was bombarded across the entire sample and parallel 
to the Tb thickness gradient. 
Magnetic patterning 
A layered Si/Ti-4nm/Au-30nm/(Tb-1.1nm/Co-0.66nm)6/Au-5nm film was magnetically 
patterned by bombardment with He+ 10keV ions with two different doses: D = 11015 
He+/cm2 and D = 31015He+/cm2 [54]. The patterning was carried out by covering the layer 
system with 400 nm thick photoresist (this thickness is enough to protect the film from ion 
modification). A mask was used to photolithographically pattern four distinct areas. The 
patterns in these areas consisted of periodic arrays of squares of side a = 3, 12.5, 25, 100 
μm, with the centers of neighboring squares separated by a distance of 2a Fig. S1 in 
supplementary materials). The total area of each of these arrays was 11mm2, i.e. large 
enough for hysteresis loops measurements using our P-MOKE magnetometer (which has a 
laser spot of 0.3 mm in diameter). Independently, a 1x1mm2 area not covered with the 
photoresist was also manufactured for reference. The above described pattern was 
replicated for experiments with different values of D.  
 
Magnetic measurements. Magnetooptical hysteresis loops in polar configuration (P-
MOKE) were measured in the same way as described in our previous paper  [39] using a 
laser with 640 nm wavelength. Images of magnetic structure and movies illustrating 
magnetization reversal process were recorded using a P-MOKE microscope.  
 
Micromagnetic simulations 
To simulate the ferrimagnetic alloy film, we used cubic discretization cells with very small 
size (1nm). For each cell a uniform random number has been assigned which determines 
the material of which it is made. With this procedure, the alloy is modelled as a cubic 
granular structure with random occupancy by the RE element. We believe that the granular 
structure captures two important physical features: first, because the individual sublayers 
of Co/Tb multilayer are very thin the system does not form continuous films but tends to 
behave as an alloy; second, the difference in atomic sizes between the RE and the TM 
causes the structure to be amorphous rather than crystalline. In this way, the granular 
structure used in our simulations resembles the formation of islands during the depositionprocedure. Using this approach, two features of ferrimagnets at compensation can be 
demonstrated qualitatively: the vanishing of magnetization saturation and the unbounded 
growth of the coercive field. 
 
We emphasize that the cited parameter values used in the micromagnetic modelling are 
given solely to facilitate replication of our micromagnetic simulations. We do not claim to 
have obtained a quantitative agreement between simulations and experiment. We show 
instead that the qualitative features can be reproduced in the simulation. A quantitative 
matching would require performing numerical analysis of the errors introduced when a 
continuous alloy is represented by discrete grains. This task is beyond the scope of this 
paper. For this reason, in this micromagnetic simulation section we would refer to the 
different elements in the structure using generic names (RE and TM).  
The effect of ion bombardment in the ferrimagnet is modelled by separating the system 
into two distinct regions. Inside the bombarded area we reduce the RE occupancy 
probability and decrease the strength of the crystalline anisotropy of the TM. We simulate 
a strip long enough in one direction to cover a full period of the structure. The simulation 
box is 4m20nm5nm with periodic boundary conditions in two dimensions. 
Longitudinally, the bombarded area is placed in the central region with margins of 1m 
from each end of the strip; in the transversal and vertical directions it spans the whole 
simulation box. 
To describe RE+ and TM+ regions (corresponding, in the experiment, to protected and 
bombarded areas, respectively) four material regions are used to specify: first, whether the 
cell is occupied with RE or with TM elements; and second, if the cell is in the pristine (out) 
or the bombarded area (in). Any cell in the simulation belongs to one of the following 
regions: REin, REout, TMin, TMout. The parameters were chosen to capture the following 
known properties of ferrimagnets [55,56]: weak ferromagnetic interaction between 
neighboring RE-RE cells, a stronger ferromagnetic interaction between neighboring Co-Co 
atoms, and an even stronger antiferromagnetic interaction between adjacent TM-RE cell 
pairs. The magnetic moment of the RE cells was chosen to produce a compensation point 
at 22% [57]. The easy-axis of effective anisotropy is oriented perpendicular to the surface. 
The crystalline anisotropy constant for the TM is weaker for cells located in the bombarded 
area but is everywhere larger than that of RE cells which all have the same value assigned. 
The material parameters are summarized in Table 1  
Region 
(x) 




3
m
MJ
Ku
 




m
MA
M S
 





m
pJ
A
RE
x
 





m
pJ
A
TM
x
 
REin 
1.067 
5.08 
7 
-24 
REout 
1.067 
TMin 
1.342 
1.42 
-24 
14 
TMout 
1.742 
Table 1 Material Parameters. The exchange constants
y
x
A 
should be read as the coupling between elements in row x 
and column y. These ad-hoc values have been chosen to reproduce the qualitative features of our experiments and should 
not be considered as the estimations of actual material parameters. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank M. Schmidt and J. Aleksiejew for technical support. The 
work was financed by the National Science Centre Poland under SONATA BIS funding 
UMO-2015/18/E/ST3/00557. M.M. and A.M. acknowledge financial support from the  
National 
Science 
Centre 
Poland 
through 
the 
SONATINA 
project 
UMO-
2018/28/C/ST5/00308. 
 
 References 
[1] 
A. Moser, K. Takano, D. T. Margulies, M. Albrecht, Y. Sonobe, Y. Ikeda, S. Sun, 
and E. E. Fullerton, J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 35, R157 (2002).[2] 
J. I. Martin, J. Nogues, K. Liu, J. L. Vincent, and I. K. Schuller, J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater. 256, 449 (2003). 
[3] 
B. D. Terris and T. Thomson, J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 38, R199 (2005). 
[4] 
B. D. Terris, T. Thomson, and G. Hu, Microsyst. Technol. 13, 189 (2006). 
[5] 
L. Fallarino, A. Oelschlägel, J. A. Arregi, A. Bashkatov, F. Samad, B. Böhm, K. 
Chesnel, and O. Hellwig, Phys. Rev. B 99, 024431 (2019). 
[6] 
F. Ando, M. Ishibashi, T. Koyama, Y. Shiota, T. Moriyama, D. Chiba, and T. Ono, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 252402 (2018). 
[7] 
P. Tierno, T. H. Johansen, and T. M. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem. B 111, 3077 (2007). 
[8] 
J. Loehr, D. de las Heras, M. Loenne, J. Bugase, A. Jarosz, M. Urbaniak, F. 
Stobiecki, A. Tomita, R. Huhnstock, I. Koch, A. Ehresmann, D. Holzinger, and T. M. 
Fischer, Soft Matter 13, 5044 (2017). 
[9] 
J. Loehr, D. de las Heras, A. Jarosz, M. Urbaniak, F. Stobiecki, A. Tomita, R. 
Huhnstock, I. Koch, A. Ehresmann, D. Holzinger, and T. M. Fischer, Commun. Phys. 1, 4 
(2018). 
[10] 
D. Holzinger, D. Lengemann, F. Göllner, D. Engel, and A. Ehresmann, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 100, 153504 (2012). 
[11] 
D. Holzinger, I. Koch, S. Burgard, and A. Ehresmann, ACS Nano 9, 7323 (2015). 
[12] 
A. Hubert and R. Schäfer, Magnetic Domains: The Analysis of Magnetic 
Microstructures (Springer, Berlin ; New York, 1998). 
[13] 
M. Hehn, S. Padovani, K. Ounadjela, and J. P. Bucher, Phys. Rev. B 54, 3428 
(1996). 
[14] 
J.-P. Adam, J.-P. Jamet, J. Ferré, A. Mougin, S. Rohart, R. Weil, E. Bourhis, and J. 
Gierak, Nanotechnology 21, 445302 (2010). 
[15] 
P. Kuświk, I. Sveklo, B. Szymański, M. Urbaniak, F. Stobiecki, A. Ehresmann, D. 
Engel, P. Mazalski, A. Maziewski, and J. Jagielski, Nanotechnology 23, 475303 (2012). 
[16] 
P. Kuświk, A. Ehresmann, M. Tekielak, B. Szymański, I. Sveklo, P. Mazalski, D. 
Engel, J. Kisielewski, D. Lengemann, M. Urbaniak, C. Schmidt, A. Maziewski, and F. 
Stobiecki, Nanotechnology 22, 095302 (2011). 
[17] 
C. Chappert, Science 280, 1919 (1998). 
[18] 
A. Gaul, S. Hankemeier, D. Holzinger, N. D. Müglich, P. Staeck, R. Frömter, H. P. 
Oepen, and A. Ehresmann, J. Appl. Phys. 120, 033902 (2016). 
[19] 
A. Ehresmann, I. Koch, and D. Holzinger, Sensors 15, 28854 (2015). 
[20] 
A. Ehresmann, D. Lengemann, T. Weis, A. Albrecht, J. Langfahl-Klabes, F. 
Göllner, and D. Engel, Adv. Mater. 23, 5568 (2011). 
[21] 
P. Kuświk, A. Gaul, M. Urbaniak, M. Schmidt, J. Aleksiejew, A. Ehresmann, and 
F. Stobiecki, Nanomaterials 8, 813 (2018). 
[22] 
A. Wawro, Z. Kurant, M. Jakubowski, M. Tekielak, A. Pietruczik, R. Böttger, and 
A. Maziewski, Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 014029 (2018). 
[23] 
M. M. Jakubowski, M. O. Liedke, M. Butterling, E. Dynowska, I. Sveklo, E. 
Milińska, Z. Kurant, R. Böttger, J. von Borany, A. Maziewski, A. Wagner, and A. Wawro, 
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 31, 185801 (2019). 
[24] 
P. Warin, R. Hyndman, J. Glerak, J. N. Chapman, J. Ferré, J. P. Jamet, V. Mathet, 
and C. Chappert, J. Appl. Phys. 90, 3850 (2001). 
[25] 
J. Gierak, E. Bourhis, M. N. Mérat Combes, Y. Chriqui, I. Sagnes, D. Mailly, P. 
Hawkes, R. Jede, L. Bruchhaus, L. Bardotti, B. Prével, A. Hannour, P. Mélinon, A. Perez, 
J. Ferré, J.-P. Jamet, A. Mougin, C. Chappert, and V. Mathet, Microelectron. Eng. 78–79, 
266 (2005). 
[26] 
A. Gaul, D. Emmrich, T. Ueltzhöffer, H. Huckfeldt, H. Doğanay, J. Hackl, M. I. 
Khan, D. M. Gottlob, G. Hartmann, A. Beyer, D. Holzinger, S. Nemšák, C. M. Schneider, 
A. Gölzhäuser, G. Reiss, and A. Ehresmann, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 9, 2968 (2018). 
[27] 
P. Mazalski, P. Kuświk, I. Sveklo, I. Soldatov, J. McCord, R. Schäfer, A. Wawro, 
and A. Maziewski, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 477, 317 (2019).[28] 
M. Stärk, F. Schlickeiser, D. Nissen, B. Hebler, P. Graus, D. Hinzke, E. Scheer, P. 
Leiderer, M. Fonin, M. Albrecht, U. Nowak, and J. Boneberg, Nanotechnology 26, 205302 
(2015). 
[29] 
E. Albisetti, D. Petti, M. Pancaldi, M. Madami, S. Tacchi, J. Curtis, W. P. King, A. 
Papp, G. Csaba, W. Porod, P. Vavassori, E. Riedo, and R. Bertacco, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 
545 (2016). 
[30] 
N. Zingsem, F. Ahrend, S. Vock, D. Gottlob, I. Krug, H. Doganay, D. Holzinger, 
V. Neu, and A. Ehresmann, J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 50, 495006 (2017). 
[31] 
C. Blanco-Roldán, Y. Choi, C. Quirós, S. M. Valvidares, R. Zarate, M. Vélez, J. M. 
Alameda, D. Haskel, and J. I. Martín, Phys. Rev. B 92, (2015). 
[32] 
T. Hauet, J. A. Borchers, P. Mangin, Y. Henry, and S. Mangin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 
(2006). 
[33] 
B. Hebler, P. Reinhardt, G. L. Katona, O. Hellwig, and M. Albrecht, Phys. Rev. B 
95, (2017). 
[34] 
T. Kobayashi, H. Tsuji, S. Tsunashima, and S. Uchiyama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 20, 
2089 (1981). 
[35] 
F. Stobiecki, T. M. Atmono, S. Becker, H. Rohrmann, and K. Röll, J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater. 148, 497 (1995). 
[36] 
K. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Ling, and Z. Xu, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 452, 153 (2018). 
[37] 
T. Hauet, F. Montaigne, M. Hehn, Y. Henry, and S. Mangin, Phys. Rev. B 79, 
(2009). 
[38] 
X. Li, C. T. Ma, J. Lu, A. Devaraj, S. R. Spurgeon, R. B. Comes, and S. J. Poon, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 012401 (2016). 
[39] 
Ł. Frąckowiak, P. Kuświk, M. Urbaniak, G. D. Chaves-O’Flynn, and F. Stobiecki, 
Sci. Rep. 8, 16911 (2018). 
[40] 
L. Ertl, G. Endl, and H. Hoffmann, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 113, 227 (1992). 
[41] 
J. Šmakov, S. Lapinskas, E. . Tornau, and A. Rosengren, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
190, 157 (1998). 
[42] 
G. Garreau, M. Farle, E. Beaurepaire, and J. . Kappler, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 184, 
289 (1998). 
[43] 
A. V. Svalov, P. A. Savin, G. V. Kurlyandskaya, J. Gutiérrez, and V. O. 
Vas’kovskiy, Tech. Phys. 47, 987 (2002). 
[44] 
A. R. Khorsand, M. Savoini, A. Kirilyuk, A. V. Kimel, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, and 
T. Rasing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, (2013). 
[45] 
S. Alebrand, U. Bierbrauer, M. Hehn, M. Gottwald, O. Schmitt, D. Steil, E. E. 
Fullerton, S. Mangin, M. Cinchetti, and M. Aeschlimann, Phys. Rev. B 89, (2014). 
[46] 
A. Hassdenteufel, C. Schubert, J. Schmidt, P. Richter, D. R. T. Zahn, G. Salvan, M. 
Helm, R. Bratschitsch, and M. Albrecht, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 112403 (2014). 
[47] 
V. Baltz, B. Rodmacq, A. Bollero, J. Ferré, S. Landis, and B. Dieny, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 94, 052503 (2009). 
[48] 
J.-P. Jamet, S. Lemerle, P. Meyer, J. Ferré, B. Bartenlian, N. Bardou, C. Chappert, 
P. Veillet, F. Rousseaux, D. Decanini, and H. Launois, Phys Rev B 57, 14320 (1998). 
[49] 
M. Kisielewski, J. Kisielewski, I. Sveklo, A. Wawro, and A. Maziewski, IEEE 
Trans. Magn. 53, 1 (2017). 
[50] 
T. Devolder, Phys. Rev. B 62, 5794 (2000). 
[51] 
M.  Donahue  and  D.  G.  Porter, OOMMF User’s  guide,  Version1.0,  Interagency  
Report  NISTIR  6376,  National  Institute  of Standards   and   Technology,  Gaithersburg,   
MD,   1999:   URL:http://math.nist.gov/oommf. 
[52] 
X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and M. Ezawa, Sci. Rep. 6, 24795 (2016). 
[53] 
H. Y. Yuan, W. Wang, M.-H. Yung, and X. R. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 97, 214434 
(2018). 
[54] 
D. Lengemann, D. Engel, and A. Ehresmann, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 053303 (2012).[55] 
C. Schubert, Magnetic Order and Coupling Phenomena (Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, 2014). 
[56] 
N. H. Duc, T. D. Hien, D. Givord, J. J. M. Franse, and F. R. de Boer, J. Magn. 
Magn. Mater. 124, 305 (1993). 
[57] 
M. H. Tang, Z. Zhang, S. Y. Tian, J. Wang, B. Ma, and Q. Y. Jin, Sci. Rep. 5, 
10863 (2015).Fig. 1 a) Sketch of a layer system consisting of a stack of an RE+ and a TM+ 
ferromagnetic film. Red and blue arrows indicate the magnetizations of the RE and TM 
magnetic subsystems, respectively, black arrows indicate the effective magnetization of the 
layers. The magnetization configuration is depicted at magnetic saturation, displaying an 
interfacial DW (green area) between the RE+ and the TM+ layer b) Sketch of a 
ferrimagnetic layer, displaying alternating RE+ and TM+ regions after local modification 
by keV light-ion bombardment. The magnetic configuration is also depicted at magnetic 
saturation, displaying DWs (green areas) between the RE+ and TM+ regions. 
 
 
Fig. 2 a) Coercive field HC as a function of Tb sublayer thicknesses of the Si/SiOx/Ti-
4nm/Au-30nm/(Tb-wedge/Co-0.66nm)6/Au system in the as-deposited state and after He+ 
(10 keV) ion bombardment with D=11015 He+/cm2 and D=31015 He+/cm2. The upper 
horizontal axis shows the corresponding effective concentration of Tb in the whole layer 
system, cTb, for a given Tb thickness. The dashed line corresponds to tTb = 1.1 nm which 
was chosen for experiments presented in Fig. 3. The hysteresis loops corresponding to 
large points (tTb=1.1 nm) in panel a) are presented in panels b), c) and d) for D=0, 
D=11015He+/cm2, and D=31015He+/cm2, respectively.Fig. 3 Full and minor (full and open symbols, respectively) P-MOKE hysteresis loops 
measured 
for 
a 
Si/Ti-4nm/Au-30nm/(Tb-1.1nm/Co-0.66nm/)6/Au-5nm 
system 
magnetically patterned using ion bombardment (He+ 10 keV) with doses D = 11015 
He+/cm2 (a,c) and D = 31015 He+/cm2 (b,d). The different colors in panels (a, b) 
correspond to different sizes of patterned squares. The hysteresis loops presented in the 
lower panels correspond to reference areas (c, d). The magnetic field corresponding to the 
minor loop shift Hmls is indicated only for a=12.5 m. The panels (e, f) show the 
magnetization orientation in the matrix (M) and the squares (S). The black, blue and red 
arrows correspond to effective magnetization, magnetization of the Co and of the Tb 
magnetic subsystems, respectively. DWs are indicated with green. The magnetic structure 
inside the DW is shown in Fig.4e.  Panels (g,h) show differential images (difference 
between images recorded at a given magnetic field and at saturation in negative field) of 
magnetic structure recorded using magnetooptical Kerr microscope in polar configuration. 
The photographs are arranged in rows corresponding to magnetic field ranges related to the 
minor loop reversal of the 12.512.5 μm squares from 1 to 2 g) and from 2 to 1 h).Fig. 4 a) Hysteresis loops obtained from OOMMF simulations for a patterned strip for 
randomized distributions of Tb cells. The magnetization perpendicular to the plane, mz, is 
normalized accounting for the total number of Co and Tb cells. b) Free energy 
(magnetostatic+anisotropy+exchange), c) Sum of anisotropy and magnetostatic energies; 
and d) exchange energy as functions of applied field for the sweep of the hysteresis loop 
from 25 kOe to -25 kOe. To facilitate comparison, the energy terms in the saturated state 
are set to zero. (e, g) Cross section of the Co (red arrows) and Tb (blue arrows) 
magnetization configuration in the region between RE+ and TM+ areas at magnetic field 
H = 25 kOe and H = -3 kOe corresponding to state 1 and 2. (f, h) Normalized mz 
component at distance x away from the boundary between the RE+ and the TM+ regions. 
In state 1 (at saturation) a DW is present - the Co and Tb spins rotate along the x-direction 
with continuous changes in normalized magnetization keeping its sign (f). In contrast, state 
2 shows no DW between magnetic domains with antiparallel magnetization (h). The error 
bars in f) and h) correspond to the standard deviation of 11 simulations with different 
random distributions.