Modeling the Transition between Localized and Extended Deposition in Flow
Networks through Packings of Glass Beads
Gess Kelly1, Navid Bizmark3,4, Bulbul Chakraborty1, Sujit S. Datta3, and Thomas G. Fai2∗
1Martin A. Fisher School of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453
2Mathematics Department & Volen Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453
3Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
and
4Princeton Materials Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
(Dated: March 28, 2023)
We use a theoretical model to explore how ﬂuid dynamics, in particular, the pressure gradient and
wall shear stress in a channel, aﬀect the deposition of particles ﬂowing in a microﬂuidic network.
Experiments on transport of colloidal particles in pressure-driven systems of packed beads have
shown that at lower pressure drop, particles deposit locally at the inlet, while at higher pressure
drop, they deposit uniformly along the direction of ﬂow. We develop a mathematical model and use
agent-based simulations to capture these essential qualitative features observed in experiments. We
explore the deposition proﬁle over a two-dimensional phase diagram deﬁned in terms of the pressure
and shear stress threshold, and show that two distinct phases exist. We explain this apparent phase
transition by drawing an analogy to simple one-dimensional models of aggregation in which the
phase transition is calculated analytically.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Deposition and aggregation of ﬁne particles in mi-
croﬂuidic networks and porous media play an impor-
tant role in various natural and industrial processes
such as water puriﬁcation, geotextile ﬁltration, appli-
cations in precision drug delivery and similar biomed-
ical tasks, transport of microplastics, environmental
cleanups, groundwater pollutant removal, oil recovery,
and transport of nanomaterials for groundwater aquifer
remediation [1–7] [8–11]. For example, in ﬁltration pro-
cesses, understanding of the deposition dynamics of col-
loidal particles plays a signiﬁcant role in improving ﬁlter
eﬃciency via reducing ﬁlter fouling [12–14].
Observa-
tions from [15] indicate that, regardless of the charge of
the colloidal particles ﬂowing in the bead network, apply-
ing lower pressures across the system leads to localized
deposition under various conditions. This may suggest
that irrespective of the exact local clogging mechanism
(e.g., bridging versus aggregation [16]), the interplay of
hydrodynamical variables in these systems controls the
resulting deposition proﬁle. We focus on the role of ap-
plied pressure diﬀerence ∆P as one of the key variables
motivated by the experimental design in [15] and the wall
shear stress τw, which has been shown in past studies
to play an important role in erosion [17–19]. Here, the
shear stress at the wall τw refers to the shear stress ex-
perienced by colloidal particles deposited on the walls of
the packing. We follow the approach of [19] to capture
the role of the shear stress threshold τ, a material pa-
rameter that describes the threshold shear stress at the
wall above which ﬂuid ﬂow erodes the deposited particles
from the walls. Table S1 in the Supplementary Material
∗tfai@brandeis.edu
contains representative parameter values.
Throughout
the text, we use a hat notation, e.g., ∆ˆP, to denote the
corresponding variables, e.g., ∆P, that are normalized
by a set value relevant to the experimental system. Ta-
ble S2 in the Supplementary Material contains additional
details.
Our speciﬁc system of interest is motivated by recent
experiments from [15], in which a constant pressure dif-
ference ∆P applied to a packing of disordered glass beads
of length L drives a ﬂuid ﬂow containing a suspension of
colloidal particles. These experiments show that at larger
pressure diﬀerences, the proﬁle of particles deposited on
the solid matrix extends uniformly along the length of the
packing, while at lower pressures, the particles deposit lo-
cally at the inlet where they are injected into the system.
Here, we develop a mathematical model to explain how
the pressure diﬀerence inﬂuences the deposition proﬁle.
Past studies of simple mass-aggregation models [14, 21]
motivate us to explore the phase space of shear stress
threshold ˆτ and pressure diﬀerence ∆ˆP. In particular,
Majumdar et al. [21] consider minimal systems and lat-
tice models in which discrete masses diﬀuse at a constant
unit rate, which normalizes the overall timescale. Multi-
ple masses may aggregate at lattice sites after diﬀusion,
and units of masses erode (chip away) from blocks at
a constant chipping rate w. Physically, chipping corre-
sponds to single-particle dissociation in processes such as
polymerization and competes with coalescence. In this
simplest case, they work with two independent variables,
the chipping rate w and mass density ρ, that remain con-
stant and determine the behavior of the system at steady
state.
They explore the phase space consisting of the
mass density ρ and chipping rate w and show that these
ﬁnite systems exhibit two distinct phases at steady state,
only one of which involves an inﬁnite aggregate. One im-
portant diﬀerence between the simple mass-aggregation
model and our study is the ﬁxed density or constant to-
arXiv:2210.01780v2  [cond-mat.soft]  26 Mar 20232
FIG. 1. We use a network approach to model the bead packing
here shown in the absence of particles.
(a) We skeletonize
the image of the packing, and then generate a network. The
edges of the network represent the channels through which
ﬂuid may ﬂow in the packing and the nodes represent the
junctions where these channels meet. (b) We obtain the ﬂow
rates in the channels by applying the Kirchhoﬀ’s laws [20].
(c) Zoomed-out view showing the network as a whole. The
color in (b) and (c) shows the magnitude of the channel ﬂow
rates in SI units (m3/s). (a) and (b) have the same scale bar.
The grey background shows the experimental micrograph of
the beads.
tal mass with periodic boundary conditions in contrast
to our model where there is a ﬂux of particles into and
out of the system.
We formulate the ﬂuid ﬂow through the packings by
applying the hydraulic analogy to the network of channels
extracted from the bead packing images. Using our net-
work model and deposition and erosion laws, we demon-
strate a similar transition in the normalized shear stress
threshold ˆτ and pressure ∆ˆP phase space. Motivated by
these simple models of aggregation and fragmentation ex-
plored in previous studies [21, 22], we explore the model
phase space spanned by two dimensionless parameters,
and identify a transition between extended and localized
deposition regimes in terms of the key parameters of pres-
sure diﬀerence and shear stress threshold [23].
II.
METHODS
We use a graph- or network-based approach [24, 25]
to model the porous network created by the beads as
shown in FIG. 1(a). The idea of modeling a porous sys-
tem as a network has been studied previously [26–28].
For instance, past studies have demonstrated the eﬀec-
tiveness of a network-based approach by highlighting the
role of disorder on the ﬂow distribution in porous media
[29].
We use images of two-dimensional (2D) slices of
the three-dimensional (3D) packing. We then generate
the model network based on these images. Because of
the expected diﬀerences between the ﬂow in 2D and 3D,
we do not expect to quantitatively recover all aspects of
the experiments. In such network models, each pore or
channel is typically represented by an edge in a network
representing the entire porous system (see FIG. 1.(a)).
Each edge may be weighted in terms of its conductance
and the nodes of the network represent junctions between
the edges. Assuming we have an incompressible ﬂuid, the
inﬂow and outﬂow of particles and ﬂuid must be equal
to respect mass conservation. In our system of interest,
boundary junctions at the inlet and outlet are subject to
two pressures held constant for the duration of the ex-
periment. To solve for the resulting channel ﬂow rates,
as shown in FIG. 1 (b) and (c), we apply Kirchhoﬀ’s
circuit laws. For each channel, we estimate the channel
length l and diameter d from the image of the network to
calculate the channel conductance g, which is deﬁned as
the proportionality constant between the volumetric ﬂow
rate through a given channel and the pressure diﬀerence
across the channel given by the Hagen-Poiseuille law [20]:
g = πd4
128ηl,
(1)
where η is the dynamic viscosity. The resolution of the
image in FIG. 1 tends to be lower along the boundaries
and our image processing does not accurately identify a
signiﬁcant portion of the channels. We use the largest
connected component of the model network, which is in
the interior of the packing. For this reason we neglect
the upper and lower boundaries.
More details regard-
ing channel ﬂow rate calculations can be found in the
Supplementary Material. The total ﬂow rate is of order
10−10 m3/s once we account for the depth of the three-
dimensional system.
To capture the stochastic eﬀects, we use agent-based
modeling to model the particles as they deposit and erode
within the network. This distinguishes our study from a
closely related previous model of erosion in networks in
which diﬀerential equations are used to predict how ero-
sion changes the width of the channels in the network
[28]. Another diﬀerence is our assumption that the glass
beads that form the network remain ﬁxed over the course
of the simulation. Consequently, while the deposited par-
ticles may erode in our simulation, the channels them-
selves do not erode. Because initially the channel does
not contain any deposited particles, and since erosion
only occurs through removal of particles, the channel
width cannot grow beyond its initial value.
Particles enter the system from the inlet at constant
time intervals. This is a discrete approximation to the
experiments, in which the particles are injected continu-
ously at a constant volume fraction. This is also diﬀer-
ent from the conserved-mass aggregation models of [21]
where the density is constant. As particles deposit in the
network during the simulations, they cause a decrease in
the width of the channels, which may eventually lead to
topological changes when the number of deposited par-
ticles surpasses the channel capacity, i.e., clogging. We
assume that each time a particle is deposited (eroded),3
it causes a uniform reduction (increase) in the channel
width. This assumption is motivated by the separation of
length scales in the experiments, in which the glass bead
diameter is approximately 40µm so that the particle-to-
bead size ratio is approximately 0.03.
We follow the suggested model of [19] in deﬁning the
deposition rate λd and erosion rate λe of particles us-
ing shear stress thresholds: the deposition threshold τd
and erosion threshold τe, and shear stress at the chan-
nel wall τw. Since we are interested in cases in which
both deposition and erosion occur, to reduce the num-
ber of independent parameters, here, we assume that the
wall shear stress thresholds for deposition and erosion are
equal, i.e., τd = τe = τ, so that the deposition rate and
erosion rate equations are:
λd(τ) =
(
κd(τ −τw),
if τw < τ
0,
otherwise,
(2)
and
λe(τ) =
(
κe(τw −τ),
if τw > τ
0,
otherwise.
(3)
Here, κd and κe are deposition and erosion coeﬃcients
that depend on solid properties, respectively [19].
We
note that τw depends on the imposed ﬂuid ﬂow condi-
tions, whereas τd and τe reﬂect the material properties
of the deposited particles independent of ﬂow. In par-
ticular, a larger τ requires a larger wall shear stress for
particle erosion. We run the simulation for multiple val-
ues of ∆ˆP and ˆτ, keeping all other parameters, including
the length of the medium ˆL, constant.
III.
RESULTS
In both experiments and simulations, the cumulative
distribution function F(x) of deposited particle positions
varies signiﬁcantly between the localized and extended
deposition regimes. We approximate this function as
F(x) ≈N(X ≤x)/N,
(4)
where N(X ≤x) is the number of deposited particles at
position less than or equal to x, and N is the the total
number of deposited particles. The position along the
direction of the ﬂow x is normalized by the full length of
the medium. As shown in FIG. 2, when the deposition is
localized, F(x) attains a value near 1 for x < 0.5, show-
ing that most of the deposited particles are close to the
inlet. In contrast, in the extended deposition case, F(x)
has a more linear form with F(x) ≈0.5 when x = 0.5.
More information regarding the normalization constants
is included in Table S2 in Supplementary Material.
Our simulations reveal that for each wall shear stress
threshold ˆτ, there exists a critical pressure ∆ˆPc that sep-
arates the localized and extended regimes (FIG. 3). For
t
t max
0
Localized
Extended
FIG. 2.
The cumulative probability distribution function
F(x) of positions of particles deposited along the ﬂow di-
rection for the localized and the extended case obtained by
simulation and experiment show a similar qualitative behav-
ior. Darker colors indicate later times. The position along
the direction of the ﬂow x is normalized by the total length
of the medium. The labels indicate the normalized pressure
gradient.
a speciﬁc value of ˆτ, choosing ∆ˆP larger (smaller) than
the critical value leads to extended (localized) deposi-
tion. To ﬁnd the critical pressure ∆ˆPc for a given ˆτ, we
vary ∆ˆP in the simulation while keeping all other pa-
rameters constant. As we decrease ∆ˆP, the percentage
of the deposited particles in the ﬁrst half of the system
increases. We mark ∆ˆPc as the smallest ∆ˆP when the
deposition is localized. FIG. 4 visualizes ∆ˆPc for various
values of ˆτ and how the two regimes of localized and ex-
tended deposition are separated in the normalized shear
stress threshold and pressure phase space. This behav-
ior is similar to the phase transitions observed in sim-
ple mass-aggregation models on lattice sites, with shear
stress and pressure appearing on the corresponding axes
of the phase diagram as the chipping rate and density in
the chipping and aggregation model [21, 30]. The solid
curve in FIG. 4 is the best power law ﬁt motivated by the
power law relation between the model parameters in [21].
In particular, we ﬁt to a function of the form axb + c.
Majumdar et al. use the steady-state mass distribution
to study the behavior and dynamical phase transition of
their model, in which the distribution transitions from
an exponential to a power-law with an aggregate [21].
Our numerical investigation of the mass distribution has
revealed signs of a similar behavior when transitioning
between the extended and localized phases. However, an
accurate classiﬁcation of the transition seen in our model
requires a more rigorous study of the critical point. Iden-
tifying the transition point in complex non-equilibrium
systems such as ours where a free energy description of
the system does not exist is a diﬃcult task, and as a ﬁrst
step, one may simplify some of the complexities of the4
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3 
∆P 
0.2632 
0.5263
0.7895
1.0526
1.3158
1.5789
FIG. 3. The ﬁnal frames of the simulation over a range of values of shear stress threshold ˆτ and applied pressure ∆ˆP show
a clear separation between the localized and extended deposition regimes similar to experimental observations in [15]. The
dashed line serves to guide the eye.
FIG. 4. In the parameter space of normalized pressure ∆ˆP
and shear stress threshold ˆτ, a boundary separates the two
regimes of localized and extended deposition, reminiscent of
the phases in [21]. The ﬁlled circles show the critical values of
pressure Pc at which the transition to the localized phase oc-
curs in simulations. The solid line corresponds to the best ﬁt
∆ˆP = 1.04ˆτ 0.71 −0.04. The hat notation used here denotes
normalization by the maximum value.
system to map it to other solvable models.
In the experiments, one of the tunable parameters is
∆ˆP. We further assume that ˆτ is an independent param-
eter that depends on ﬂuid, particle, and pore network
properties. Given a system with a ﬁxed ˆτ, we expect lo-
calized deposition at lower ∆ˆP, and extended deposition
at higher ∆ˆP for the same network as seen in experi-
ments [15] and simulations. FIG. 3 supports this reason-
ing. For particles with a given shear stress threshold ˆτ,
as we increase ∆ˆP, a smaller percentage of deposition
occurs near the inlet of the medium, consistent with the
experimental ﬁndings. In the ﬁgure, the red borders in-
dicate localized deposition, as deﬁned by comparison to
a representative experiment, and the green borders indi-
cate extended deposition. More details on categorizing
localized and extended deposition are found in the Sup-
plementary Material. In the SM, we also demonstrate
that this transition occurs over a range of sizes. The hat
notation used here denotes normalization by a set value.
The programming scripts used in generating the simula-
tions discussed in this section are accessible on GitHub
[31].
IV.
DISCUSSION
Capturing the dynamics of deposition in porous media
and microﬂuidic systems has wide implications in ﬁltra-
tion studies. Understanding what leads to localized de-
position helps in improving ﬁlter eﬃciency [26]. Experi-
ments such as [15] provide more insight into the inﬂuence
of global system hydrodynamics on uniformity of depo-
sition proﬁles. Our theoretical model successfully cap-
tures the behavior observed in the experiments in [15].
Our network-based approach and model of shear-based
deposition and erosion reveal a transition from the lo-
calized to extended regime in the phase space of shear
stress threshold and pressure in colloidal transport within
packings of beads. Given a system of beads, there ex-
ists a critical pressure above which the deposition proﬁle
becomes increasingly more uniform (see FIG. 4). This
transition from the localized to extended regime is simi-
lar to what has been observed in previous studies of sim-
ple mass-aggregation models [21].
The observation in
similarities between these models of aggregation and our
current model leads us to believe such analogies may be
present in other systems, as well, where the key variables
may be diﬀerent. Future applications to other systems
including ﬁltration may examine and identify what vari-
ables control the phase transition in the system.
Our model may be thought of as a two-dimensional
inhomogeneous asymmetric expansion of the mass-
aggregation model in [21]. Uncovering the limitations to
this analogy requires a careful analysis. One important
distinction between the two models concerns the bound-
ary conditions. In the simple mass-aggregation model,5
the total mass is constant, whereas in our model, there
is a regular inﬂux of particles into the system and par-
ticles may exit at the outlet boundary. Some other rele-
vant models that allow an inﬂux of particles include the
aggregation-chipping model with open boundary condi-
tions [32] and totally asymmetric simple exclusion (or
inclusion) processes on networks [33, 34]. In our case,
the direction of ﬂow makes the model asymmetric, and
although the simple mass-aggregation model also shows
a phase transition in two dimensions, it belongs to a dif-
ferent universality class [30, 35].
Moreover, Rajesh et
al. have shown that subtle changes such as making the
deposition rate mass-dependent lead to diﬀerent models
with no phase transitions [36]. In our case, we assume
identical particles with the same laws for deposition and
erosion that do not explicitly depend on mass of individ-
ual particles; however, the ﬂow, deposition, and erosion
rates may change with time and diﬀer for each channel.
These diﬀerences lead to spatial bias and signs of chan-
nelization [19, 28, 37] where particles frequent a few paths
rather than all paths in the system. Studies suggest in
real world applications of the model, the rate of erosion
and shear threshold for erosion may depend on particle-
particle interactions and spatial distribution of particles
[37], similar to a mass-dependent law. Past studies con-
sidering the role of particle interactions in deposition re-
port that strong particle interactions lead to a decrease
in the transient ﬂow rate [8]. We hypothesize that this
decrease would lead to a lower eﬀective local shear stress
at the channel walls and hence a more localized deposi-
tion proﬁle. Since particles act as agents in the model
and simulations, adding interactions would be a possible
expansion of the model in the future.
We note that, although the model is successful in cap-
turing the essential behavior of the system, some details
regarding the clogging mechanism are lost due to coarse-
graining. This is most apparent in FIG. 2 in which the
deposition appears to become more localized over time
in experiments in contrast to simulations. It would be
interesting to explore what leads to this diﬀerence in ex-
periment and simulation observations by expanding the
model to three dimensions. Additionally, one may ex-
pand (2) and (3) to consider an overlap region such that
τe < τd where for some values of wall shear stress, both
deposition and erosion occur, or a gap region τd < τe
where for some values of wall shear stress, neither depo-
sition nor erosion occur similar to the generalizations in
[19].
V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge funding from NSF grant DMS-
1913093 to GK and TGF. We also acknowledge com-
putational support from the Brandeis HPCC which is
partially supported by the NSF through DMR-MRSEC
2011846 and OAC-1920147.
SSD acknowledges fund-
ing from NSF DMR-2011750. NB acknowledges support
from a postdoctoral fellowship of the Princeton Center
for Complex Materials (PCCM). BC acknowledges the
support of NSF-CBET 1916877.
[1] J. Linkhorst, T. Beckmann, D. Go, A. J. C. Kuehne,
and M. Wessling, Microﬂuidic colloid ﬁltration, Scientiﬁc
Reports 6, 22376 (2016).
[2] Y. Faure, A. Baudoin, P. Pierson, and O. Pl´e, A contri-
bution for predicting geotextile clogging during ﬁltration
of suspended solids, Geotextiles and Geomembranes 24,
11 (2006).
[3] C. Kleinstreuer, J. Li, and J. Koo, Microﬂuidics of nano-
drug delivery, International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 51, 5590 (2008), biomedical-Related Special Is-
sue.
[4] A. Al Harraq and B. Bharti, Microplastics through the
lens of colloid science, ACS Environmental Au 2, 3
(2022).
[5] X. Zhao, W. Liu, Z. Cai, B. Han, T. Qian, and D. Zhao,
An overview of preparation and applications of stabilized
zero-valent iron nanoparticles for soil and groundwater
remediation, Water Research 100, 245 (2016).
[6] S. R. Kanel, J.-M. Gren`eche, and H. Choi, Arsenic(V) re-
moval from groundwater using nano scale zero-valent iron
as a colloidal reactive barrier material, Environmental
Science & Technology 40, 2045 (2006), pMID: 16570634.
[7] T. Phenrat, H.-J. Kim, F. Fagerlund, T. Illangasekare,
R. D. Tilton, and G. V. Lowry, Particle size distribution,
concentration, and magnetic attraction aﬀect transport
of polymer-modiﬁed Fe0 nanoparticles in sand columns,
Environmental Science & Technology 43, 5079 (2009),
pMID: 19673310.
[8] E. S. Boek, H. K. Ladva, J. P. Crawshaw, and J. T.
Padding, Deposition of colloidal asphaltene in capillary
ﬂow: Experiments and mesoscopic simulation, Energy &
Fuels 22, 805 (2008), https://doi.org/10.1021/ef700670f.
[9] E. S. Boek, T. F. Headen, and J. T. Padding, Multi-scale
simulation of asphaltene aggregation and deposition in
capillary ﬂow, Faraday Discuss. 144, 271 (2010).
[10] E. S. Boek, A. D. Wilson, J. T. Padding, T. F. Headen,
and J. P. Crawshaw, Multi-scale simulation and exper-
imental studies of asphaltene aggregation and deposi-
tion in capillary ﬂow, Energy & Fuels 24, 2361 (2010),
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef9010059.
[11] K. A. Lawal, J. P. Crawshaw, E. S. Boek, and V. Veso-
vic, Experimental investigation of asphaltene deposi-
tion in capillary ﬂow, Energy & Fuels 26, 2145 (2012),
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef201874m.
[12] N. Delouche, A. B. Schoﬁeld, and H. Tabuteau, Dynamics
of progressive pore clogging by colloidal aggregates, Soft
Matter 16, 9899 (2020).
[13] A. Cirillo, G. Tomaiuolo, and S. Guido, Membrane foul-
ing phenomena in microﬂuidic systems: From technical
challenges to scientiﬁc opportunities, Micromachines. 12
(2021).6
[14] M. P. Dalwadi, I. M. Griﬃths, and M. Bruna, Under-
standing how porosity gradients can make a better ﬁlter
using homogenization theory, Proceedings of the Royal
Society. A, Mathematical, physical, and engineering sci-
ences 471, 1 (2015).
[15] N. Bizmark, J. Schneider, R. D. Priestley, and S. S.
Datta, Multiscale dynamics of colloidal deposition and
erosion in porous media, Science Advances 6, eabc2530
(2020).
[16] E. Dressaire and A. Sauret, Clogging of microﬂuidic sys-
tems, Soft Matter 13, 37 (2016).
[17] L. Ristroph, M. N. J. Moore, S. Childress, M. J. Shelley,
and J. Zhang, Sculpting of an erodible body by ﬂowing
water, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109, 19606 (2012).
[18] N. Schorghofer, B. Jensen, A. Kudrolli, and D. H. Roth-
man, Spontaneous channelization in permeable ground:
theory, experiment, and observation, Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 503, 357 (2004).
[19] R. J¨ager, M. Mendoza, and H. Herrmann, Channeliza-
tion in porous media driven by erosion and deposition,
Physical Review E 95, 013110 (2017).
[20] H. Bruus, Theoretical Microﬂuidics, Oxford Master Series
in Physics ; 18 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007).
[21] S. N. Majumdar, S. Krishnamurthy, and M. Barma,
Nonequilibrium phase transitions in models of aggrega-
tion, adsorption, and dissociation, Physical Review Let-
ters 81, 3691 (1998).
[22] R. Rajesh and S. N. Majumdar, Exact phase diagram of
a model with aggregation and chipping, Physical Review
E 63, 361141 (2001).
[23] There are diﬀerent combinations of parameters (such as
ﬂow rate and pressure) that one could potentially choose,
but as long as there is a way to map from one to the other,
they are expected to be equivalent.
[24] B. Bollob´as, Modern graph theory, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics ; 184 (Springer, New York, 1998).
[25] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespignani, Dynamical
Processes on Complex Networks (Cambridge University
Press, 2008).
[26] I. Griﬃths, A. Kumar, and P. Stewart, A combined net-
work model for membrane fouling, Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science 432, 10 (2014).
[27] S. Redner, Fractal and multifractal scaling of electrical
conduction in random resistor networks, in Mathematics
of Complexity and Dynamical Systems, edited by R. A.
Meyers (Springer New York, New York, NY, 2011) pp.
446–462.
[28] A. Zareei, D. Pan, and A. Amir, Temporal evolution of
erosion in pore networks: From homogenization to insta-
bility, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 234501 (2022).
[29] K. Alim, S. Parsa, D. A. Weitz, and M. P. Brenner,
Local pore size correlations determine ﬂow distributions
in porous media, Physical Review Letters 119, 144501
(2017).
[30] S. N. Majumdar, S. Krishnamurthy, and M. Barma,
Nonequilibrium phase transition in a model of diﬀusion,
aggregation, and fragmentation, Journal of statistical
physics 99, 1 (2000).
[31] Modeling
the
transition
between
localized
and
ex-
tended
deposition
in
ﬂow
networks
through
pack-
ings
of
glass
beads,
https://github.com/gsiraji/
particleDeposition.
[32] H. Sachdeva, M. Barma, and M. Rao, Condensation
and intermittency in an open-boundary aggregation-
fragmentation model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 150601
(2013).
[33] I. Neri, N. Kern, and A. Parmeggiani, Totally asymmetric
simple exclusion process on networks, Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 068702 (2011).
[34] S. Reuveni, O. Hirschberg, I. Eliazar, and U. Yechiali,
Occupation probabilities and ﬂuctuations in the asym-
metric simple inclusion process, Phys. Rev. E 89, 042109
(2014).
[35] R. Rajesh and S. Krishnamurthy, Eﬀect of spatial bias
on the nonequilibrium phase transition in a system of
coagulating and fragmenting particles, Phys. Rev. E 66,
046132 (2002).
[36] R. Rajesh, D. Das, B. Chakraborty, and M. Barma, Ag-
gregate formation in a system of coagulating and frag-
menting particles with mass-dependent diﬀusion rates,
Physical Review E 66, 056104 (2002).
[37] A. Kudrolli and X. Clotet, Evolution of porosity and
channelization of an erosive medium driven by ﬂuid ﬂow,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 028001 (2016).
[38] J. Rommes and W. H. A. Schilders, Eﬃcient methods for
large resistor networks, IEEE Transactions on Computer-
Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 29, 28
(2010).
[39] D. Zhang and G. Lu, Review of shape representation and
description techniques, Pattern Recognition 37, 1 (2004).
[40] H. Chatbri, K. Kameyama, and P. Kwan, A comparative
study using contours and skeletons as shape represen-
tations for binary image matching, Pattern Recognition
Letters 76, 59 (2016), special Issue on Skeletonization
and its Application.
[41] Z. Jiang, K. Wu, G. Couples, M. I. J. van Dijke,
K. S. Sorbie, and J. Ma, Eﬃcient extraction of networks
from three-dimensional porous media, Water resources
research 43, W12S03 (2007).
[42] MATLAB, version 7.10.0 (R2022b) (The MathWorks
Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, 2022).
[43] P. Kollmannsberger, M. Kerschnitzki, F. Repp, W. Wa-
germaier, R. Weinkamer, and P. Fratzl, The small world
of osteocytes:
connectomics of the lacuno-canalicular
network in bone, New journal of physics 19, 73019 (2017).
[44] C. Tien, B. Ramarao, and R. Yasarla, A blocking model
of membrane ﬁltration, Chemical engineering science
111, 421 (2014).
[45] K.-J. Hwang and H.-C. Liu, Cross-ﬂow microﬁltration
of aggregated submicron particles, Journal of membrane
science 201, 137 (2002).7
VI.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
S1. Solving for the Channel Flow Rates
To solve for the channel ﬂow rates in the system, we
ﬁrst start by processing the image of the glass bead pack-
ing and formulating the corresponding network. Then,
following the steps outlined in [38] closely, we solve for
the local pressure and channel ﬂuid dynamics.
Given an image of the packing of glass beads, we use
built-in functions in MATLAB to binarize and skele-
tonize the image [39–42].
Then, we use the package
Skel2Graph3D [43] to generate the graph (network) G
representing the skeleton network. Each edge in the net-
work represents a channel (pore) and stores its geomet-
rical properties such as its diameter dj and length lj,
which are calculated from the image, and its hydrody-
namics such as its ﬂow rate qj, shear stress at the wall
τj, and conductance gj. Each node ni in the network
represents a junction where multiple channels meet and
stores its position xi and pressure pi. Similar to the ex-
periments, the pressure values at the boundary nodes
at the entrance and exit of the ﬂow in the system are
prescribed and kept constant throughout the simulation.
This allows us to solve for the unique values of pressure
at the bulk nodes using the Kirchhoﬀ’s laws.
To solve for the pressure in the bulk, ﬁrst, we rearrange
the pressure p and nodal ﬂow rate values j, separating
the ones associated with the boundary and bulk, and
ordering them such that the boundary values denoted
as jB and pB appear at the top of the vectors and the
internal connection values follow after:
j =

jB
0

,
(S5)
and
p =

pB
pC

.
(S6)
Note that since this is a boundary value classical Kirch-
hoﬀ’s problem with ﬁxed pressure at the boundary nodes,
the nodal ﬂow rate at the bulk (non-boundary nodes)
jC = 0 due to conservation of mass. We then formulate
the weighted Laplacian L of the porous structure graph
(network)
L = DgDT ,
(S7)
where D denotes the incidence matrix, DT its transpose,
and g the vector of channel conductances. The solution
to the boundary nodal ﬂow rates is given by
jB = LSpB,
(S8)
where LS is the Schur complement of the Laplacian ma-
trix. To obtain the bulk pressures pC, we then solve the
inverse matrix problem

jB
0

= L

pB
pC

.
(S9)
By Ohm’s law, to obtain channel ﬂow rate qj for chan-
nel j, we use the pressure diﬀerence at the channel end-
nodes, pj1, pj2:
qj = gj(pj1 −pj2),
(S10)
where we calculate the conductance gj by approximating
the channels as cylinders with diameter dj and length lj:
gj =
πd4
j
128ηlj
.
(S11)
We may now also calculate the channel shear stress τj:
τj = 32qjη
πd3
j
.
(S12)
S2. Modeling the Particle Deposition and Erosion
Particles are injected at regular time steps. The in-
jection period, Tinj the time passed in between each two
consecutive particle injections, is calculated as follows
Tinj = 2Ttransit,
(S13)
where Ttransit is the approximate time that it takes the
ﬂow to take one particle from the inlet to the outlet:
Ttransit =
L
q/d
2 .
(S14)
Here, L, q, and d are the total length of the medium,
the mean channel ﬂow rate and the mean channel di-
ameter. Each particle is initialized as an object at a ran-
dom inlet boundary node and stores its position (ﬂoating
point), edge number (integer), node number (integer),
and whether it is deposited (logical). The node number
indicates if a particle has arrived at a junction where the
number corresponds to the node and is otherwise set to
0. When a particle arrives at a node, it is assigned an
edge that connects that node to a node with lower pres-
sure. If there are multiple such edges, the edge is picked
with a probability that is proportional to the ﬂow rate
in the edge. The edge number of the particle is then set
to reﬂect its new edge assignment. After the particle is
assigned an edge, it travels with the channel speed vj
calculated from the ﬂow rate:
vj = 4qj/(πd2
j).
(S15)
Choosing an appropriately small time step is crucial here,
since higher pressure systems have higher mean ﬂow rates
and thus higher transport velocities. The time step ∆t
must be small enough to get accurate results and to avoid
unintentionally large transport distances in a channel.
While traveling in an edge if the channel shear stress
τj = τw is lower than the threshold for deposition τd, the8
w
FIG. S5. The deposition rate of the particles is highest at
wall shear stress τw = 0, and then monotonically decreases
until τw = τd.
The erosion rate of the deposited particles
monotonically increases for τw > τe.
particle may deposit with the probability θd at each time
step ∆t:
θd = κd(τd −τw)∆t,
(S16)
where κd is the deposition coeﬃcient. If the channel shear
stress is above this threshold, θd = 0.
If the particle
deposits, its deposition number is changed from 0 to 1.
At each time step, if the channel shear stress τj = τw
is higher than the threshold for erosion τe, a deposited
particle may erode with the probability
θe = κe(τw −τe)∆t,
(S17)
where κe is the erosion coeﬃcient. The capacity of each
edge is determined by the ratio of its diameter and the
diameter of the particles. When τe = τd = τ,
θd(τ) =
(
κd(τ −τw)∆t,
if τw < τ
0,
otherwise
(S18)
and
θe(τ) =
(
κe(τw −τ)∆t,
if τw > τ
0,
otherwise.
(S19)
In summary, in the model, the deposition probability
is highest at zero wall shear stress, and monotonically
decreases until τw = τ and then the erosion probability
monotonically increases for τw > τ as shown in the sketch
FIG S5. After deposition, if the number of deposited par-
ticles in an edge grows larger than its capacity, the edge
becomes blocked and temporarily removed from the net-
work, and the pressure values and hydrodynamics are
recalculated for the network. If the deposited particles
are eroded in an edge such that it is no longer blocked,
the network hydrodynamics are again calculated with the
edge reinserted in the network. Throughout the simula-
tion, we regularly apply the Kirchhoﬀ’s laws and solve
for local pressure and ﬂow rate values as the network
changes.
(a)
(b)
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Localized
Extended
FIG. S6. In the parameter space of normalized pressure ∆ˆP
and shear stress threshold ˆτ, a boundary separates the two
regimes of localized and extended deposition, reminiscent of
the phases in [21]. In the Main Text we show a similar ﬁg-
ure for an 82% threshold for particles deposited in the ﬁrst
half of the medium. Regardless of the speciﬁc categorization
scheme, (a) choosing 75% instead of 82% for half-medium,
or (b) tracking statistics for quarter-medium instead of half-
medium and choosing 68% as the transition point, we see the
same essential results. The ﬁlled circles correspond to results
gathered from 10 trials and the solid lines show the best ﬁt
curve of the form axb + c.
S3. Categorizing the Localized Deposition Proﬁles
We repeat the trials only varying the pressure diﬀer-
ence and the threshold for erosion.
To quantitatively
distinguish between localized and extended deposition,
we consider the following deﬁnition for the former: by
the end of the simulation, if the percentage of deposited
particles in the ﬁrst half of the medium is more than or
equal to 82%, we categorize the trial as localized.
In9
TABLE S1.
The table contains a list of all the symbols used in this paper, what they denote, and their value or range of
values from simulations in SI units. Similar values from past experiments are in [15].
parameter
symbol
range
Pressure Diﬀerence Across the Device
∆P
6 × 104 −2.4 × 105Pa
Total Flow Rate
Q
10−12 −10−11m3/s
Local (Edge) Flow Rate
q
10−14 −10−13m3/s
Wall Shear Stress Threshold
τ
Wall Shear Stress
τw
Hydraulic Resistance of the Porous Medium
R
Channel (Edge) Diameter
d
Dynamic Viscosity
η
6 × 10−2Pa · s
Particle Diameter
dp
1µm
Erosion Coeﬃcient [19]
κe
0.17s/m
Deposition Coeﬃcient [19]
κd
1.7s/m
TABLE S2.
The table shows the normalized variables that
appear in the Main Text and speciﬁc values used to normalize
each variable. Multiplying each normalized variable by the
value listed here would result in its physical value in SI units.
variable
normalization constant
∆ˆP
1.95 × 105Pa
ˆτ
3.8Pa
ˆL
6 × 10−3m
other words, as we decrease the pressure diﬀerence while
keeping other variables constant, we note the transition
from extended to localized deposition as the ﬁrst instance
when 82% of particles are deposited in the ﬁrst half of the
medium near the inlet. To calculate these percentages,
we use representative experimental data for each regime.
From the images that show particle deposition across the
medium, we calculate the percentage of pixels in the ﬁrst
half or ﬁrst quarter of the medium, assuming that the
number of deposited particles is proportional to the pixel
count in images from the experiment. We expect our es-
sential results to be independent of this speciﬁc choice of
the transition value.
To further test this assumption, we repeat the simula-
tion trials for two diﬀerent categorization schemes which
are also supported by experimental data. In one case,
corresponding to Fig. S6 (a), if more than 75% of the
deposited particles were deposited in the ﬁrst half of the
medium, we categorize the trial as localized. In case two,
corresponding to Fig. S6 (b), if in one trial, more than
68% of the deposited particles were deposited in the ﬁrst
quarter of the medium, we categorize that trial as local-
ized. As Fig. S6 demonstrates, regardless of the speciﬁc
categorization, the essential results of the model remain
the same as long as the choice of parameters are reason-
able given the experimental observations.
The critical
transition values for pressure divide the phase space into
two regions of localized and extended. For each case, we
∆P
 0.03
 0.13
 0.23
 0.33
 0.44
0.6579
FIG. S7. Here, the size of the system is half the one used
in the Main Text. The ﬁnal frames of the simulation over a
range of values of applied pressures ∆ˆP and at a representa-
tive shear threshold values ˆτ show a clear separation between
the localized and extended deposition regimes similar to ex-
perimental observations and the results shown in the Main
Text. The green or red border represents extended or local-
ized, respectively.
use the MATLAB curve ﬁtting tool to ﬁnd the best ﬁt
[42]. The ﬁtted curves shown in Fig. S6 are power laws
of the form axb +c. These curves are shown as solid lines
with a = 1.28, b = 0.67, and c = −0.067 in Fig. S6 (a)
and a = 0.93, b = 0.46, and c = −0.37 in Fig. S6 (b)
respectively. The search for the transition point involves
repeating the trials at least 30 times for each set of ˆτ and10
∆P
 1.00
 1.51
 2.03
 2.54
 3.56
 3.05
0.6579
FIG. S8. Here, the size of the system is approximately double
the one used in the Main Text. The ﬁnal frames of the simu-
lation over a range of values of applied pressures ∆ˆP and at
a representative shear threshold values ˆτ show a clear sepa-
ration between the localized and extended deposition regimes
similar to experimental observations and the results shown in
the Main Text. The green or red border represents extended
or localized, respectively.
∆ˆP, 10 for the transition point with an uncertainty of
0.5%, 10 for a lower bound, 10 for an upper bound.
Past studies on colloidal particle interactions similarly
show that varying the global hydrodynamics such as ap-
plied pressure or ﬂow rate lead to diﬀerent deposition
regimes consistent with our observations shown in FIG. 4
and FIG. S6. In particular, in [8] Boek et al. simulate col-
loidal ﬂow of asphaltene particles and ﬁnd that increas-
ing the interaction strength leads to diﬀerent deposition
regimes where permanent clogging occurs for stronger in-
teractions. Note that, however, this is not directly com-
parable to our work since the channel considered in these
models corresponds to one of the many channels in our
simulations. Their work considers a more detailed sim-
ulation of deposition dynamics in a single channel while
our work considers a network of such channels with phe-
nomenological laws for the erosion and deposition.
One diﬀerence between the experiments and simula-
tions is in the chronological progression of the deposi-
tion proﬁle. In the experiments, the deposition proﬁle
tends to become more localized over time. In contrast,
as shown in FIG. 2, in simulations, the deposition pro-
ﬁle becomes more uniform at later times. One possible
explanation lies in the details of clogging mechanism. In
experiments, as more particles aggregate at the inlet, the
mechanism behind clogging of particles evolves while on
the contrary, the simulations assume a simple clogging
mechanism and do not capture the details of clogging
such as cake formation [44, 45] due to coarse-graining
and 2D consideration of this 3D problem.
All results presented in the Main Text correspond to
one bead packing.
Our algorithm, however, works for
other bead packing networks, as well. Here, we demon-
strate that the transition occurs in systems of diﬀerent
sizes (taking the size to be half and double). As FIG.
S7 and FIG. S8 show, starting from the localized regime
and at a set shear stress threshold, increasing the pres-
sure leads to a more uniform deposition and eventually,
to the extended regime.
Here, we have used the 82%
threshold to categorize extended and localized cases sim-
ilar to the Main Text. Notably, as FIG. S8 shows the
algorithm works well for larger networks in which the
number of edges is several times greater than in the orig-
inal network.