Ab initio studies of ionization potentials of hydrated hydroxide and hydronium
Charles W. Swartz and Xifan Wu
Department of Physics, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA
The ionization potential distributions of hydrated hydroxide and hydronium are computed with
many-body approach for electron excitations with conﬁgurations generated by ab initio molecular
dynamics. The experimental features are well reproduced and found to be closely related to the
molecular excitations. In the stable conﬁgurations, the ionization potential is mainly perturbed by
water molecules within the ﬁrst solvation shell. On the other hand, electron excitation is delocalized
on both proton receiving and donating complex during proton transfer, which shifts the excitation
energies and broadens the spectra for both hydrated ions.
PACS numbers: 61.25.Em, 71.15.Pd, 82.30.Rs, 79.60-i
The nature of the solvation structures of hydroxide
(OH−) and hydronium (H3O+) aqueous solutions are of
fundamental interest. It is the prerequisite to understand
the mechanism of proton transfer (PT) through the au-
toprolysis process in water, which is behind diverse phe-
nomena in physics, chemistry and biology [1–7].
Pho-
toemission spectroscopy (PES) has recently emerged as
an important experimental technique in elucidating the
interactions between hydrated ions and surrounding wa-
ter molecules [6, 8]. In PES experiment, the ionization
potential (IP) is measured by the energy required to re-
move an electron from the molecule with respective to
the Fermi level.
The state-of-art PES measurement is
now able to detect the spectra signals from solvated ions
which has been successfully used to determine the IPs
of hydrated OH−and H3O+ [6]. To have an insightful
understanding of the experiments, there is a critical need
for theoretical modeling, at atomic scale, which can un-
ambiguously connect the IP and its distributions to its
solvation structures.
Given the disordered structures of the liquids can be
simulated by ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) [10,
11], the PES spectra can be computed by the electron ex-
citation theory such as Hedin’s GW self-energy approx-
imation [12, 13]. However, such a theoretical approach
has not yet been applied to the study of the PES spectra
in ion solutions. The diﬃculty lies in the fact that the
quasiparticle method scales unfavorably with the system
size [13]. On the other hand, a proper simulation of disor-
dered liquid structure requires a large supercell modeling.
The computational burden is even more severe when it
is necessary to take into account the statistical ﬂuctu-
ations of solvation structures both from the underlying
H-bond network and more drastically, from the structural
diﬀusion of PT. As a compromise, the computationally
eﬃcient static density functional theory (DFT) [9] or the
semiclassical approximation was used [6]. However, the
static DFT designed for ground state electron minimiza-
tion strongly underestimates the IP as an electron exci-
tation property [6, 9, 13]. Because of the same diﬃculty,
the precise assignment of IPs for these hydrated ions has
yet not been accurately determined.
To address the above issues, in the current work we
generate the liquid structures of solvated hydroxide and
hydronium in water by AIMD simulations and then com-
pute the PES spectra within many-body formalism for
electron excitation. In particular, we adopt a recently
implemented methodology treating the inhomogeneous
electronic screening of the medium [14–17], in which the
maximally localized Wannier functions [18] are used to
greatly increase the computational eﬃciency.
The IPs
of hydrated hydronium and hydroxide are determined by
the real-space projection of quasiparticle density of states
on these solvated ion complexes. The resulting IPs and
their distribution are in quantitative agreement with ex-
periments in both position and broadening. The IPs of
hydrated ions in liquid solutions are associated with the
molecular excitation, however, strongly inﬂuenced by the
water molecules in the ﬁrst solvation shell. During the
PT, the structural diﬀusion results in a delocalzied de-
fect eigenstate. As a result, the IPs of hydrated ions are
broadened and shift into the main feature of bulk water.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that
GW based quasiparticle theory has been applied to the
PES spectra of ion solutions. This approach will be also
useful to study other important liquids.
Ion solutions are generated by two equilibrated AIMD
trajectories [10] containing either one hydroxide or hy-
dronium with 63 surrounding water molecules. A peri-
odic cubic cell corresponding to the experimental ambi-
ent density of water is used. Both simulations are pre-
ceded by a 3 ps equilibrium run and then continued over
a 25 ps time scale within the canonical ensemble. An el-
evated temperature of T = 330K is used, which has been
found to approximately capture structural softening of
H-bond in liquid water due to the quantum nuclear ef-
fect [19]. The atomic force is calculated by DFT using
the PBE functional [20] with a kinetic energy cutoﬀof 70
Ry. Electron excitation calculations are completed using
the static Coulomb hole and screened exchange (COH-
SEX) approach combined with electron screening eﬀects
from the inhomogeneous medium within the Hybertsen-
Louie ansatz.
All calculation are performed using the
arXiv:1306.0855v1  [physics.chem-ph]  4 Jun 20132
FIG. 1:
(color online) Theoretical PES spectra (red line) for
the (a) OH−and (b) H3O+ ion solutions. The shaded (blue)
area indicates the IPs of hydrated OH−and H3O+ [22].
QUANTUM-ESPRESSO code package [21].
In Fig. 1 we present our theoretical PES spectra of
both ion solutions based on quasiparticle density of states
(QDOS). It can be seen that the overall PES spectra of
both hydronium and hydroxide solutions are dominated
by three features belonging to bulk water, which have
1b2, 3a1, and 1b1 characteristics with decreasing excita-
tion energy as shown in Fig. 2(a), (b), and (c) respec-
tively.
The IP is associated with the valence electron
excitation of solvated ion in water. Although embedded
in the water solution PES spectra, it still can be iden-
tiﬁed by the realspace projection of the QDOS onto the
hydrated ions in the energy range [22]. The resulting IP
distributions of hydrated hydroxide and hydronium are
also shown in the shaded areas of Fig. 1(a) and (b) re-
spectively. It can be seen that the main feature of the
IP of hydrated OH−is represented by a narrow distribu-
tion, whose peak centered at 9.99 eV and close to the low
energy edge of the 1b1 feature of bulk water. The spectra
signal is much less obvious in the 3a1 region and almost
absent in the 1b2 region of bulk water. As far as the IP of
hydrated H3O+ is concerned, the only prominent feature
is a broad peak centered at 19.01 eV close to the high en-
ergy edge of 1b2 feature of bulk water. Much less signal
is found in 3a1 region and almost no signal is found in
1b1 region of bulk water. Strikingly, current theory accu-
rately reproduces the experimental measurement [6], in
which the IPs of hydrated hydroxide and hydronium are
found to be centered at ∼9.2 eV and ∼20 eV respec-
tively. The spectra distribution of solvated hydronium
is also found to be much broader than that of hydroxide
in experiment [6]. In stark contrast, the previous stud-
ies based on DFT calculations revealed that the IPs of
solvated OH−and H3O+ were located at ∼12 eV and
∼5 eV respectively, which underestimated the experi-
mental value over 50% [9]. This is because DFT, as a
ground state theory, strongly underestimates the opti-
cal band gap properties. For a direct comparison with
PES experiments, the electron excitation process can be
more appropriately described by the GW self-energy ap-
proximation.
We want to stress here that the IPs for
both solvated ions are averaged over 100 conﬁgurations,
weighted to include both PT [23] and non-PT conﬁgura-
tions, sampled during the 25 ps equilibrium trajectory.
PT conﬁgurations account for ∼10% of the total OH−
conﬁgurations and ∼16% of the H3O+ conﬁgurations.
The accurate quasiparticle predictions now enable
more precise assignment of the IPs of hydrated ions. In
Fig. 2, we present the representative quasiparticle wave-
functions (QWs) for the main features, which are located
close to 1b1 region of bulk water for hydrated OH−and
close to 1b2 region of bulk water for hydrated H3O+. The
typical QWs of less prominent features are also shown in
Fig. 2, whose energies are in the 3a1 region of bulk water
for both ion solutions. For comparison, the three lowest
IP energy states of the OH−and H3O+ monomer are
also presented. The similarity of the electron excitation
in ion solutions and that in gas phases indicates that the
IPs should be attributed to molecular ionization, how-
ever, strongly perturbed by the solvation structures of
the surrounding water molecules.
Clearly, the main feature of the IP in hydrated hy-
droxide at 9.99 eV should be assigned to the ﬁrst valence
electron excitation of OH−monomer. This is due to the
resemblance of the electron excitations between the gas
phase and the liquid solution. In the aqueous solution,
the typical QW of the main feature is a well localized hy-
droxide defect state of clear lone pair character as shown
in Fig. 2(g) and (i). It originates from two degenerate 1π
bonds of the OH−monomer. The degeneracy is broken
by the disordered liquid structure and results in an ex-
citation distribution instead of one single ionization en-
ergy. It can be expected that the spectra distribution
is largely dependent on the solvation structure and will
be diﬀerent with or without PT. In the absence of PT,
current AIMD simulation ﬁnds that solvated hydroxide
adopts the most stable conﬁguration in such a way that
OH−accepts four H-bonds with the possibility of donat-
ing one [1]. The four water molecules donating H-bond
are approximately in one plane. Consistently this lone
pair QW is mainly localized on the OH−itself, how-
ever, with a signiﬁcant weight on the water molecules
within the ﬁrst solvation shell. Thus without PT, the
IP is mainly aﬀected by the ﬂuctuating ﬁrst-shell solva-
tion structure embedded in the H-bond network of liquid
water. During PT, the OH−exchanges one proton with3
H2O
1b2
3a1
1b1
Gas Phase
OH−
3a1
1b1
Gas Phase
Liquid So-
lution:
No PT
Liquid So-
lution:
PT
H3O+
1b2
3a1
Gas Phase
Liquid So-
lution:
No PT
Liquid So-
lution:
PT
FIG. 2:
(color online) QWs shown for gas phase (a)-(c) H2O,
(d)-(e) OH−and (j)-(k) H3O+. Typical main feature 3a1 and
1b1 QWs displayed for hydrated OH−in liquid solution while
(f)-(g) in a non-PT complex and (h)-(i) during a PT. Similar
1b2 and 3a1 QWs displayed for hydrated H3O+ while (l)-(m)
in the Eigen complex and (n)-(o) in the Zundel complex.
neighboring water molecule. Our current simulation in-
dicates that the PT mechanism is consistent with the
dynamical hypercoordination scenario proposed by Tuck-
erman et al [1]. The structural diﬀusion is initiated by
breaking one of the four accepting H-bonds and followed
by a proton exchange along the shortest H-bond.
In-
triguingly, the structural diﬀusion is accompanied by a
nontrivial change in the electronic state. The lone pair
QW is now localized on both proton donating and pro-
ton receiving molecules as shown in Fig. 2(i) instead of its
main localization on OH−only before the PT in Fig. 2(g).
The delocalized QW facilitates its hybridization with sur-
rounding water molecules. As a result, the IP exhibits
a blue shift towards the main feature of the bulk wa-
ter spectra accompanied by a broadened distribution as
illustrated in Fig. 3(a).
In a similar scenario, we assign the main feature of
the IP distribution of hydrated hydronium to the second
valence excitation of two degenerate p orbitals of H3O+
monomer. The degeneracy is again broken by the disor-
dered molecular environment. Without PT, the excited
QW has a similar characteristic of 1b2 of liquid water
and is mainly localized on the so-called Eigen complex
(H3O+) as shown in Fig. 2(l). In particular, a large or-
bital amplitude is also found on the three water molecules
along the direction of donated H-bonds by H3O+. The
QW then decays rapidly to zero in the second solvation
shell and beyond. As a result, the excitation is a hydro-
nium defect state with 1b2 character that is localized on
the H9O+
4 complex, which is also the so-called strongly
solvated Eigen cation in the literature [24]. In the pro-
cess of PT, the current simulation is consistent with the
widely accepted Grottuss diﬀusion mechanism [1]. The
proton exchange takes place by the interconversion be-
tween Eigen and Zundal (H5O+
2 ) complex [1]. Not sur-
prisingly, the locality of the QW also swifts from the
Eigen to the Zundal complex during PT as shown in
Fig. 2(l) and (n) respectively. Interestingly, a signiﬁcant
weight is also found to be centered on the transferring
proton connecting both the proton receiving and donat-
ing structures, which gives a unique signal for PT in the
electronic structure.
Similar to the PT process of hy-
drated OH−, the delocalized H3O+ defect state is much
more easily to be hybridized with solvent H2O molecules.
As a result, in Fig. 3(b) we observe a red shift of the IPs
into the 1b2 region of bulk water which gets broadened
simultaneously.
Interestingly, a comparison of the IPs between these
two ion solutions reveals that the main feature of hy-
drated H3O+ has a much broader distribution than that
of OH−. We attribute it to the diﬀerence in orbital char-
acters. For the hydrated H3O+ excitation with 1b2 char-
acteristic, the covalent orbital on an OH bond is easily
perturbed by the H-bond network of liquid water. On the
other hand, the excitation of hydrated OH−is of lone pair
character and only centered on oxygen atom which will
be much less eﬀected by the embedded H-bond network.
This is also consistent with the observation that 1b1 is
already narrowed than 1b2 peak in liquid water [25].
Besides the main features, the excitations of hydrated
ions are also found in Fig. 1(a) and (b) within the 3a1 re-
gion of bulk water for both solutions. However the signals
are much weaker and broadly distributed. Nevertheless,
the IPs of hydrated ions should still be assigned to the
molecular excitation of the same 3a1 symmetry, which
are the second and ﬁrst excitation of OH−and H3O+
monomers respectively. In Fig. 4(a) and (d), we present4
FIG. 3:
(color online) Theoretical IP distributions for hy-
drated (a) OH−and (b) H3O+. The red area indicates those
conﬁgurations where the repective hydrated ion is not expe-
riencing a PT (δ > 0.6 ˚A [26]) and the blue area indicates
those conﬁgurations currently experiencing a PT (δ ∼0 ˚A).
FIG. 4:
Typical QW densities (arb. u.) for hydrated OH−
characteristic states, (a) 3a1 and (b) 1b1, and hydrated H3O+
characteristic states, (c) 1b2 and (d) 3a1, as a function of dis-
tance from O∗[22]. Inserts show the total integrated density.
typical QW densities of 3a1 excitations as a function of
distance from the solvated OH−and H3O+ respectively.
For comparison, the same quantities of the main feature
are also shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c). Clearly, in both ion
solutions, the less prominent IPs of 3a1 character orig-
inate from relatively delocalized QWs, in which a large
orbital amplitude falls into the second solvation shell and
beyond. On the contrary, QWs of the main features of
both hydrated ions are strongly localized defect states
within the ﬁrst solvation shell.
As a result, the inte-
grated charge approaching to one electron rapidly with
the increased distance away from the ions.
The delo-
calized QWs indicate a stronger hybridization with the
water solution and result in the observed broader and
weaker ion excitations.
Finally, we draw our attention to the energy range
where the least IP signals have been found. They are
the 1b2 and 1b1 region of bulk water for hydrated OH−
and H3O+ respectively. Again, this can be understood by
the symmetry of electron excitation of both ions at the
monomer level.
The electronic conﬁgurations of OH−
and H3O+ ions are intrinsically diﬀerent from that of
a single water molecule. For OH−monomer, the three
lowest allowed valence excitation are the two degenerated
excitation of 1b1 character, followed by one of 3a1 char-
acter, in which the 1b2-like orbital in water is not allowed
by symmetry. On the other hand, the three lowest va-
lence excitation in H3O+ ion are one with 3a1 character,
followed by two degenerate states with 1b2 character, in
which the lone pair 1b1-like orbital in water is forbidden.
These symmetry restrictions are also reﬂected in ion so-
lutions and result in the absence of electron excitation
for hydrated ions in the above energy range.
In conclusion, the IP distributions of hydrated OH−
and H3O+ are studied by accurate quasiparticle theory.
The excitations of solvated ions can be assigned to molec-
ular electron excitation, however, strongly perturbed by
the solvation structures. Although the main features of
IPs are determined by their stable conﬁgurations, the
proton transfer does introduce a change of position and
distributions of electron excitation in both hydrated ions.
We suggest that the excitation change due to PT can be
detected by isotope eﬀect in future PES measurements
performed on solvated H3O+ and D3O+. Because of the
quantum nuclear eﬀect lowers the barrier of proton trans-
fer [27], the hydrated H3O+ will have a more broad and
shifted IP distribution than that of D3O+. Finally we
comment that the leftover mismatch between experiment
and theory could be further reduced by more accurate liq-
uid structures considering both dispersion force [28–30]
and self-interaction error correction [31, 32] and by in-
cluding frequency dependence of excitation beyond static
GW [33, 34].
XW thanks valuable discussion with Roberto Car.
This work is supported by U.S. Department of Energy
under Grant No. DE-SC0008726. Computational sup-
port is provided by the National Energy Research Scien-
tiﬁc Computing Center.5
[1] D. Marx, A. Chandra, M. K. Tuckerman, Chem. Rev.
110, 2174 (2010).
[2] M. Tuckerman, A. Chandra, and D. Marx, Acc. Chem.
Res. 39, 151 (2006)
[3] A. Hassanali1, M. K. Prakash, H. Eshet, and M. Par-
rinello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 20410 (2011).
[4] J. T. Hynes, Nature 397, 565 (1999).
[5] D. Asthagiri, L. Pratt, J.D. Kress, and M. Gomez, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 101, 19 (2004).
[6] B. Winter, M. Faubel, I. Hertel, C. Pettenkofer, S. Brad-
forth, B. Jagoda-Cwiklik, L. Cwiklik, and P. Jungwirth,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 3864 (2006).
[7] A. Chandra, M. Tuckerman, and D. Marx, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 99, 145901 (2007).
[8] B. Winter, R. Weber, I. V. Hertel, M. Faubel, P. Jung-
wirth, E. C. Brown, and S. E. Bradforth, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 127, 7203 (2005).
[9] M. Tuckerman, K Laasonen, and M Parrinello, J. Chem.
Phys. 103, 150 (1995).
[10] R. Car, and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett, 55, 2471
(1985).
[11] P. Sit, C. Bellin, B. Barbiellini, D. Testemale, J. -L. Haza-
mann, T. Buslaps, N. Marzari, and A. Shukla, Phys. Rev.
B 76, 245413 (2007).
[12] L. Hedin, Phys. Rev. 139, A796 (1965).
[13] G. Onida, L. Reining, and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys.
74, 601 (2002).
[14] M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B 37, 2733
(1988).
[15] X. Wu, A. Selloni, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. B 79, 085102
(2009).
[16] W. Chen, X. Wu, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
017802 (2010).
[17] L. Kong, X. Wu, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. B 86, 134203
(2012).
[18] N. Marzari, A. A. Mostoﬁ, J. R. Yates, I. Souza, and D.
Vanderbilt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1419 (2012).
[19] Z. Li, Ph.D. thesis, Physics Department, Princeton Uni-
versity, 2012.
[20] J. P. Perdew,K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).
[21] P. Giannozzi, P. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car,
C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarrotti, M. Cococ-
cioni, and I. Dabo, J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 21, 395502
(2005)
[22] Individual IPs were calculated by projecting the QWs
on to a real-space sphere of 1.5 ˚A[9]
centered on the
O∗atom while in a stable complex and centered on the
transferring proton during PT [23]. The IPs of hydrated
ions are ampliﬁed by a factor of 10 in order to increase
their visibility. The identity of both the OH−and the
H3O+ are determined by counting the number of H+ in-
side a covalent radius of 1.17 ˚A for each oxygen atom in
a given conﬁguration. Those oxygens containing one or
3 H atoms within their covalent radius are referred to as
O∗and determine both OH−and H3O+ respectively.
[23] Conﬁgurations are considered to be in a Proton transfer
event when a single H+ could not be associated with any
oxygen molecules, in accordance with Ref. [22].
[24] B. Kirchner, Chem. Phys. Chem. 8, 41 (2007).
[25] D. Prenergast, J. Grossman, and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys.
123, 014501 (2005)
[26] δ is deﬁned as δ = |RO∗H −ROwH|, where RO∗H and
ROwH are the distances between a shared proton and
O∗[22] or a surrounding water molecule’s oxygen, re-
spectively. The minimum δ value for a particular O∗is
considered most likely to produce a PT, and δ = 0 in-
dicates that the shared proton is halfway between two
molecules [2].
[27] D. Marx, M. Tuckerman, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello,
Nature 397, 601 (1999).
[28] C. Zhang, and J. Wu, G. Galli, and F. Gygi, J. Chem.
Theory Comp. 7, 3054 (2011).
[29] B. Santra, J. Klimeˇs, D. Alf´e, A. Tkatchenko, Ben Slater,
A. Michaelides, R. Car, and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 185701 (2011).
[30] R. A. DiStasio, O. Anatole von Lilienfeld, and A.
Tkatchenko, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 14791 (2012).
[31] C. Zhang, T. A. Pham, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Chem.
Phys. 109, 14791 (2013).
[32] C. Zhang, D. Donadio, F. Gygi, and G. Galli J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 7, 1443 (2011).
[33] W. Kang and M. S. Hybertsen, Phys. Rev. B 82, 195108
(2010).
[34] D. Lu, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100,
147601 (2008).
[35] The static GW is found to slightly overestimate the
IP [13, 33], which can be corrected by frequency depen-
dence in GW method.