Symmetry-breaking supercollisions in Landau-quantized graphene
Florian Wendler,1, ∗Martin Mittendorﬀ,2, 3 Jacob C. König-Otto,3, 4 Samuel Brem,1 Claire Berger,5, 6 Walter A.
de Heer,5 Roman Böttger,3 Harald Schneider,3 Manfred Helm,3, 4 Stephan Winnerl,3 and Ermin Malic7
1Department of Theoretical Physics, Technical University Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany.
2Institute for Research in Electronics & Applied Physics,
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, United States.
3Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, PO Box 510119, D-01314 Dresden, Germany.
4Technische Universität Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany.
5Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
6Institut Néel, CNRS-Université Alpes, 38042, Grenoble, France
7Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden.
Recent pump-probe experiments performed on graphene in a perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld have
revealed carrier relaxation times ranging from picoseconds to nanoseconds depending on the quality
of the sample. To explain this surprising behavior, we propose a novel symmetry-breaking defect-
assisted relaxation channel. This enables scattering of electrons with single out-of-plane phonons,
which drastically accelerate the carrier scattering time in low-quality samples. The gained insights
provide a strategy for tuning the carrier relaxation time in graphene and related materials by orders
of magnitude.
In graphene, the impact of momentum-conserving
acoustic
phonon
processes
on
relaxation
of
non-
equilibrium electronic excitations is limited by the low
sound velocity, restricting the maximum energy trans-
fer per scattering event [1]. Conversely, defect-assisted
electron-phonon scattering events, so called supercolli-
sions, can have a profound impact on the relaxation time
by removing the in-plane momentum conservation, since
the excess momentum can be absorbed by defects [1–7].
For graphene in a magnetic ﬁeld, the situation is drasti-
cally changed since the in-plane translation symmetry is
broken with the consequence that the electron momen-
tum is no longer a conserved quantity, suggesting that
supercollisions are not important in Landau-quantized
graphene.
In the light of this, the experimental results for elec-
tron relaxation times between graphene Landau levels in
this letter are very surprising, since they clearly show a
strong dependence of the relaxation time on the quality
of the sample.
To explain these ﬁndings, we propose
a novel mechanism for defect-assisted electron-phonon
scattering breaking the mirror symmetry of the graphene
plane [8]. By defect we refer to local perturbations in-
troducing additional scattering channels and breaking
the mirror symmetry. Such defects could e.g. be local
electric ﬁeld gradients, interstitials, or bucklings of the
graphene plane induced by a substrate roughness or by
vacancies [9, 10]. In general, the symmetry with respect
to a mirror plane lying in the graphene plane prevents
the linear coupling of charge carriers and out-of-plane
phonons (also known as ﬂexural phonons) in a perfect
sample [11, 12]. The removal of the mirror symmetry
by defects turns out to be crucial in Landau-quantized
graphene, where carrier-phonon scattering is governed
by resonances between inter-Landau level transitions and
corresponding phonon energies [13, 14]. While the in-
Figure 1. Sketch of (a) carrier-phonon and (b) defect-assisted
carrier-phonon scattering channels governing the relaxation in
high and low quality samples, respectively. Three broadened
Landau levels (LLs) are shown with the Dirac cone in the
background. Charge carriers are excited with left circularly
polarized radiation (yellow arrows) and relax via scattering
with phonons. Feynman diagrams of the scattering processes
illustrate the diﬀerence between (a) a high quality sample
where usual carrier-phonon scattering involving the modes
ΓTO, KTO, ΓLO, KLO takes place (green arrows), and (b)
a low quality sample where the simultaneous scattering of
charge carriers with defects and phonons enable the relaxation
via out-of-plane phonons of the mode ΓZO (purple arrows).
plane optical phonon energies of graphene range from 150
to 200 meV, the out-of-plane phonon at the Γ point (the
ΓZO mode) – activated by defect-electron interaction –
has an energy of 100 meV [15–17]. For a suﬃciently large
Landau level (LL) broadening, supercollisions with ΓZO
phonons allow transitions between the three energetically
lowest levels LL±1 and LL0 at reasonable magnetic ﬁelds.
The sketches in Figure 1 compare the ordinary carrier-
phonon scattering with the defect-assisted carrier-phonon
scattering in two samples with diﬀerent qualities, where
the quality is deﬁned by the concentration of defects
breaking the mirror symmetry of the graphene plane.
arXiv:1801.08463v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  25 Jan 20182
Figure 2. Direct comparison of the carrier relaxation times
seen in diﬀerential transmission spectra (DTS) of (a) a high
quality and (b) a low quality sample in experiment and theory,
respectively. This demonstrates that the relaxation time is
two orders of magnitude faster in the low quality sample.
The yellow area in the background illustrates the width of
the pump pulse.
The orange signatures show exponential
functions ﬁtting the experimental data, and the gray area in
the experimental signal indicates secondary peaks appearing
due to reﬂections of the pump pulse which are omitted in our
analysis. Experimental DTS for the high quality sample is
shown for a longer time range up to 1 ps in the supplemental
material.
The investigated situation is very similar in both cases:
The system is excited using σ−-polarized radiation that
is in resonance with the transition LL0 →LL+1, and it
develops back to equilibrium via the emission of phonons.
While ordinary carrier-phonon scattering (LO/TO) is
possible in the high and in the low quality sample, the
relaxation in the low quality sample is governed by super-
collisions allowing the emission of out-of-plane phonons
(ΓZO). The latter phonons have a smaller energy that
approximately ﬁts the inter-LL distance of the experi-
ments discussed below. Therefore the relaxation occurs
on a picosecond timescale (τ ∼10 ps) as opposed to a
nanosecond timescale (τ ∼1 ns) in case of a high quality
sample.
We present a theoretical study supported by exper-
imental observations.
Degenerate pump-probe experi-
ments were carried out on two diﬀerent multilayer epi-
taxial graphene samples. To this end, mid-infrared radi-
ation from a free-electron laser (photon energy 75 meV,
pulse duration 2.7 ps, pump ﬂuence 0.1 µJ/cm2) of σ−-
polarization was employed for both pumping and prob-
ing. The samples were kept at 10 K in a magnetic ﬁeld
of 4.2 T perpendicular to the graphene layers. At this
ﬁeld, both pump and probe beam were resonant with
the LL0 →LL+1 transition in the samples. A mercury-
cadmium-telluride detector cooled by liquid nitrogen was
used for low-noise detection.
The two multilayer epi-
taxial graphene samples were grown by the same tech-
nique, namely thermal decomposition of the C-face of
semi-insulating 4H-SiC by the conﬁnement controlled
sublimation (CCS) method [18], however under slightly
diﬀerent growth conditions. One sample, in the following
named “low quality sample” has a low structural quality
compared to standard CCS grown epitaxial multilayer
graphene. The other one, in the following named “high
quality sample” features an extraordinary structural qual-
ity with no D-peak in the Raman spectrum [19]. Details
on the sample growth, characterization by Raman spec-
troscopy, sample doping and the carrier dynamics in ab-
sence of a magnetic ﬁeld can be found in the supplemental
material.
The applied many-particle theory is based on an ex-
pansion of the graphene Bloch equations [20–22] by out-
of-plane symmetry-breaking electron-defect interactions.
It reproduces well the surprising experimental behavior,
where decay times in two samples diﬀer by more than
two orders of magnitude, cf. Fig. 2. For the theoret-
ical modeling a pump ﬂuence of ϵpf = 1 · 10−2µJ/cm2,
and an defect-assisted level broadening of Γde = 0.1meV
(Γde = 10meV) is used for the high quality sample (low
quality sample). In accordance with Ref. [23], the doping
is set to µ = 10 meV in the high quality case, while a value
of µ = 28 meV is used in the low quality case as indicated
by Ref. [24]. Before the relaxation processes dominate,
i.e. during the excitation pulse, peaks in the transmission
featuring very fast decay times occur. They result from
the optical excitation as well as Auger scattering. Since
those have already been discussed in Ref. [24], we focus
on the slower relaxation in this work. While the high
quality sample exhibits a very slow relaxation time of
about τ ∼1 ns, the relaxation is much faster in case of
the low quality sample reaching times in the range of
τ ∼10 ps.
The explanation for the strong dependence of the relax-
ation time on the sample quality is two-fold: First, as was
already mentioned above, the carrier-phonon relaxation
rate in Landau-quantized graphene is determined by a
resonance condition of phonon energy and the energy of
the inter-LL transition. If both energies coincide for a
speciﬁc inter-LL transition, carrier-phonon scattering is
eﬃcient between the two involved LLs. Second, the exact
resonance condition is weakened by a ﬁnite broadening
that is given by the dephasing of Landau transitions which
also determines the LL broadening [25]. Therefore, oﬀ-
resonant scattering is possible and its eﬃciency increases
with the broadening of the Landau levels. Consequently,
the relaxation is faster in low quality samples where the
Landau level broadening is larger. The resonance condi-
tion is determined by the magnetic ﬁeld, responsible for
the formation of Landau-states. For the LL-transition
in a range of 100 meV, investigated here, only ﬂexural
phonons (ΓZO) provide a ﬁtting energy channel. However,
the corresponding electron-phonon scattering is symmetry
forbidden in pure graphene [11]. Here, we propose that3
this relaxation channel is activated in low quality samples
of Landau-quantized graphene by enabling carrier-ﬂexural
phonon (ΓZO) scattering due to defect-assisted electron-
phonon scattering. Only if both factors (a suﬃcient LL-
broadening and the activation of ﬂexural phonons) are
taken into account, the experimentally observed depen-
dence of the relaxation time on the quality of the sample
can be explained.
We proceed to set forth the details of the theory of
symmetry-breaking supercollisions in Landau-quantized
graphene to explain the microscopic background of the
observed surprising sample-dependent relaxation behavior.
The defect-assisted carrier-phonon scattering is described
by the Hamiltonian
H = H0 + Hel-de + Hel-ph,
(1)
consisting of a free energy part H0
= P
i ϵia†
iai +
P
p,µ ϵµqph

b†
µqphbµqph + 1/2

and two perturbations
stemming
from
disorder
Hel-de
=
P
i,f Di,fa†
fai
and
the
electron-phonon
coupling
Hel-ph
=
P
i,f
P
µqph gµ,qph
i,f
a†
fai

bµ,qph + b†
µ,−qph

.
Here, and
in the remainder of this article, the electronic states
are speciﬁed by a compound index i comprising the
spin si = ±1, valley ξi = ±1, band λi = ±1, Landau
level index ni = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and the quantum number
mi = 0, 1, 2, . . . NB −1 giving rise to the large LL
degeneracy NB = AeB/(2πℏ) that scales linearly with
the area of graphene A, the elementary charge e and the
magnetic ﬁeld strength B. Neglecting the Zeeman eﬀect
and the spin-orbit interaction, both of which are small as
compared to the level broadening in graphene [26], the
spin and valley degrees of freedom also contribute to the
degeneracy, and the low-energetic Landau level spectrum
is given by ϵi = λivF
√2niℏeB, with the Fermi velocity
[27] vF ≈1 nm/fs. Furthermore, the optical phonon is
characterized by its mode µ, momentum ℏqph and energy
ϵµqph ≈ϵµ, and the matrix elements Di,f and gµ,qph
i,f
determine the probabilities of the electronic transition
i
→
f due to electron-defect and electron-phonon
scattering, respectively.
Starting from the Hamiltonian Eq. (1), the supercolli-
sion matrix element is obtained by a multiple scattering
expansion [28] to the lowest necessary order in the LL-
basis (Fig. 1b, inset)
egi,f = ⟨f|
h
Hel-de G†
0(ϵf) Hel-ph + Hel-phG0(ϵi) Hel-de
i
|i⟩,
(2)
where |i⟩, |f⟩correspond to initial and ﬁnal Landau level
states. Introducing a ﬁnite broadening Γ (its origin is
discussed below), the free electron Green’s function reads
G0(E) = (E −H0 + iΓ)−1, which yields the supercolli-
sion matrix element
egµ,qph
i,f

em/ab
≃
X
v
"
gµ,∓qph
i,v
1
ϵi −ϵv ∓ϵµ,qph + iΓDv,f
+ Di,v
1
ϵi −ϵv + iΓgµ,∓qph
v,f
#
,
(3)
for the emission (−) and absorption (+) of the phonon
(µ, qph). In the regime of well-separated Landau levels,
we set Di,f →Di,fδλi,λf δni,nf , so that the denominator
of the second term in Eq. (3) reduces to iΓ. In a self-
consistent Born-Markov approximation, the parameter
Γ is identiﬁed by the quantum mechanical dephasing
Γi,f which determines the LL-broadening [25] and will be
explained below. The discussion of the pure LL-defect
Di,f and the pure LL-phonon interaction gi,f can be found
in the supplemental material.
Using the supercollision matrix element from Eq. 3, we
can calculate the transition probability for the emission
and absorption of phonons using the generalized Fermi’s
golden rule [29]
Wi,f = 2π
ℏ
X
µ,qph
egµ,qph
i,f

2
(4)

(nµ + 1) LΓif
 △Eem
i,f,µ

+ nµLΓif
 △Eab
i,f,µ

,
with the energy diﬀerences △Eem/ab
i,f,µ
= ϵi −ϵf ∓ϵµ for
the emission (−) and absorption (+) of a phonon, the
Bose distribution nµ, and the Lorentzian LΓ (∆E) =
Γ/
 π
 ∆E2 + Γ2
expressing energy conservation. Then,
the carrier dynamics becomes accessible via the graphene
Bloch equations [20, 22]
˙ρi =
X
j
[Wj,iρj (1 −ρi) −Wi,jρi (1 −ρj)] ,
(5)
˙pi,f = −Γi,f
ℏpi,f,
(6)
for the occupation probability ρi(t) = ⟨a†
iai⟩(t) and
the microscopic polarization pi,f(t) = ⟨a†
fai⟩(t), where
Eq. 5 is equivalent to the Boltzmann equation. The
electron-light, electron-electron and ordinary electron-
phonon interactions are omitted for reasons of clarity.
Their contribution to the carrier dynamics is taken into
account in the numerical evaluation, but it has been ex-
plained elsewhere [22, 24, 30]. The total dephasing rate
Γi,f = Γde
i,f +Γel-el
i,f +Γel-ph
i,f
+Γel-de-ph
i,f
determines the broad-
ening of the LLs and is composed of the defect-induced
dephasing Γde
i,f, and the dephasing contributions due to
the diﬀerent many-particle scattering channels. For de-
tails about Γde
i,f, Γel-el
i,f
and Γel-ph
i,f
we refer to Ref. [25].
The dephasing induced by supercollisions is given by
Γel-de-ph
i,f
=
X
j
[(Wj,i + Wj,f) ρj + (Wi,j + Wf,j) (1 −ρj)] .
(7)4
Figure 3. Scattering rates induced by diﬀerent phonon modes
in dependence of the energy of the inter-LL transition showing
clear electron-phonon resonance peaks for (a) the high quality
(Γde = 0.1meV) and (b) the low quality sample (Γde = 10meV).
At a magnetic ﬁeld of B = 4.2 T (used in the experiments),
the relevant inter-LL spacings are 75 meV (dotted vertical
lines). The insets show that in this energy range defect-assisted
electron-ΓZO-phonon scattering (de-ΓZO) clearly dominates
in the low quality sample, while it is negligible in the high
quality sample.
Note that the scattering rates given by Eq. 4 depend on
the total dephasing Γi,f which is needed to calculate the
dephasing due to supercollisions (and all the other many-
particle scattering contributions as well). Therefore, the
total dephasing is calculated self-consistently in every time
step of the numerical evaluation of the Bloch equations
(Eqs. 5-6) [31].
Before we examine the numerical results in more de-
tail, we investigate how the scattering rates scale with
the defect-induced dephasing which is proportional to
the defect-induced LL broadening.
In case of highly
oﬀ-resonant electron-phonon scattering (Γi,f ≪∆E),
the absolute square of the supercollision matrix element
(Eq. 3) scales like |egµ,qph
i,f
|2 ∝Γ2
de/Γ2
i,f, the Lorentzians
in the scattering rate (Eq. 4) can be approximated as
πLΓi,f (∆E) ≃Γi,f/∆E2, and the scattering rate hence
scales like Wi,f ∝Γ2
de/Γi,j. Moreover, in this oﬀ-resonant
regime, the self-consistently determined dephasing Γi,f is
generally of the same order of magnitude as the defect-
induced dephasing Γde
i,f, which yields an eﬀective linear
scaling of Wi,f with Γde
i,f. Consequently, to approximate
the scattering rate WLL+1→LL0 for supercollisions as well
as the other relevant electron-phonon scattering channels,
we set Γi,f →Γde
i,f. The result is shown in Fig. 3 and
demonstrates that normal electron-phonon scattering is
suppressed mainly due to the high optical phonon energies,
and likewise the smaller energy of the ΓZO-mode explains
its importance for the relaxation in Landau-quantized
graphene. Note, however, that, as long as we are in the
regime of well-separated Landau levels, the energy of
acoustic phonons is too small to have an impact on the
carrier dynamics, cf. Ref [22]. Furthermore, Fig. 3 shows
that, in the high quality sample, the supercollisions are
strongly suppressed in the relevant (oﬀ-resonant) energy
range, cf. inset of Fig. 3a, since the oﬀ-resonance enters
Figure 4. (a) Relaxation time as a function of the defect-
induced dephasing for diﬀerent dopings µ. The dashed vertical
lines mark the values of the defect-induced dephasing that
were used to model the high quality (Γde = 0.1meV) and the
low quality (Γde = 10meV) samples. (b) Initial occupation
probability of LL0 in dependence of the doping of the sample,
and eﬀective doping for a magnetic ﬁeld of B = 4.2 T assuming
that the carrier density does not change when the magnetic
ﬁeld is turned on. The dashed vertical lines mark the values
of the doping that are used in (a).
not only through the Lorentzian broadening in Eq. 4 (like
in the case of ordinary electron-phonon scattering) but
also through the energy diﬀerences in the supercollision
matrix element (Eq. 3). In the low quality sample, on
the other hand, the total dephasing is so large that the
relevant energy lies within the broadened resonance peak
of the supercollisions (purple line in Fig. 3b), which is
thus the dominant relaxation channel in this case. There-
fore, the sample quality determining the total dephasing
(via Γde
i,f), critically inﬂuences the relaxation. This is the
key to understand the drastic diﬀerence in the relaxation
times of the two experimentally investigated graphene
samples, cf. Fig. 2. Note that the scattering rates shown
in Fig. 3 are calculated under the assumption that the
total dephasing Γi,f equals the defect-induced dephasing
Γde
i,f, which is a good approximation as long as we are in
the oﬀ-resonant regime (Γi,f ≪∆E). The peak heights
are thus not to be trusted and are shown only to illustrate
the energy detuning of the relevant inter-LL spacings and
the phonon modes.
The dependence of the relaxation time on the defect-
induced dephasing, which is a measure for the sample qual-
ity, is shown in Fig. 4 (a) for diﬀerent values of the doping.
It shows a very slow relaxation for samples with zero dis-
order τ ∼10 ns which becomes about three orders of mag-
nitude faster as the disorder concentration is increased.
The very strong decrease of τ for vanishing defect-induced
dephasings Γde < 0.1 meV occurs due to the fact, that in
this case the defect-induced dephasing is no longer the
dominant contribution to the total dephasing Γ. Instead,
in the regime Γde ≪Γ, the total dephasing is essentially
determined by electron-electron scattering that does not
change the occupations – known as pure-dephasing –,
but constitutes a scattering channel which competes with
relaxation channels (like electron-phonon scattering and
supercollisions). Furthermore, we observe that the relax-
ation time depends on the doping of the sample, since5
this determines the initial occupations and therewith the
Pauli blocking, cf. the occupations in Eq. 5. Consid-
ering solely the transition LL+1 →LL0, Eq.
5 reads
˙ρ+1 = −W+1→0ρ+1 (1 −ρ0), which – assuming a con-
stant ρ0 – yields an exponential decay ρ+1 = exp(−t/τ)
with the relaxation time τ = 1/(W+1→0(1 −ρ0)). This
illustrates that τ can become very large for a nearly com-
pletely ﬁlled LL0. To understand the minimal change of
the relaxation time for dopings below ∼28meV and the
marked change for higher dopings, we take a look at the
initial value of the occupation ρ0 in dependence of the
doping of the sample, cf. black line in Fig. 4 (b), resulting
from a Fermi distribution for an eﬀective doping (purple
line). The eﬀective doping µeﬀective for a magnetic ﬁeld
of B = 4.2 T is calculated from the doping in the absence
of a ﬁeld µreal using the criterion that the carrier density
does not change when the magnetic ﬁeld is switched on,
cf. Ref. [24]. The observation that LL0 is far from be-
ing completely ﬁlled for low dopings, while it is almost
ﬁlled for dopings higher than µreal ∼40meV, explains the
doping dependence of the relaxation time.
Finally, we compare the obtained results to magneto-
transport experiments from Refs. 32 and 33, where the
temperature dependence of energy loss rates in a vari-
ety of Landau-quantized graphene samples was measured.
The results are in agreement with ordinary supercollisions
involving acoustic phonons, and the high-ﬁeld energy
loss rates are only about 40 % smaller in comparison to
the zero-ﬁeld case. This seems to contradict our results
but in fact it is consistent with our interpretation. The
samples used in the aforementioned magnetotransport ex-
periments are single layer graphene samples with a ﬁnite
doping, where the Fermi energy lies at the 8th Landau
level or higher. Therefore, according to the ﬁndings of
Ref. 34, the experiments are performed in a regime where
the Landau levels are not well separated, i.e. adjacent
Landau levels overlap. Consequently, scattering with low
energetic acoustic phonons and ordinary supercollisions
have a profound impact on the relaxation dynamics, but
supercollisions do no dramatically change the carrier dy-
namics. On the other hand, the present paper studies one
particular inter-Landau level transition (LL0 →LL+1),
where an energy gap of a few tens of meV eﬃciently su-
presses acoustic phonon scattering (too low energy) and
also in-plane optical phonon scattering (too high energy).
Here, the activation of the ΓZO phonon mode having an
intermediate energy can lead to a dramatically diﬀerent
relaxation dynamics.
In summary, the relaxation time in Landau-quantized
graphene shows a very distinct dependence on the sam-
ple quality. This is explained by a novel defect-assisted
electron-phonon scattering channel, in which disorder
breaks the mirror symmetry of graphene. These ﬁndings
demonstrate that varying the amount of disorder can be
used to tailor the relaxation time in this system over
several orders of magnitude.
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG for support through SFB
658 and SPP 1459, the EU Graphene Flagship (contract
no. CNECT-ICT-604391), the Swedish Research Council
(VR), and the NSF through grant #1506006. Support
by the Ion Beam Center (IBC) at HZDR is gratefully
acknowledged. Furthermore, we thank A. Knorr (TU
Berlin) for fruitful discussions on the carrier dynamics
in graphene, and we are grateful to J. Maultzsch (TU
Berlin) and E. Mariani (University of Exeter) for inspiring
discussions on symmetry and ﬂexural phonons.
∗ﬂorian.wendler@fu-berlin.de
[1] J. C. W. Song, M. Y. Reizer, and L. S. Levitov, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 106602 (2012).
[2] M. W. Graham, S.-F. Shi, D. C. Ralph, J. Park,
and
P. L. McEuen, Nat. Phys. 9, 103 (2013).
[3] A. C. Betz, S. H. Jhang, E. Pallecchi, R. Ferreira, G. Feve,
J.-M. Berroir, and B. Placais, Nat. Phys. 9, 109 (2013).
[4] M. W. Graham, S.-F. Shi, Z. Wang, D. C. Ralph, J. Park,
and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett. 13, 5497 (2013), pMID:
24124889.
[5] V. Eless, T. Yager, S. Spasov, S. Lara-Avila, R. Yaki-
mova, S. Kubatkin, T. J. B. M. Janssen, A. Tzalenchuk,
and V. Antonov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 093103 (2013),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4819726.
[6] A. Laitinen, M. Oksanen, A. Fay, D. Cox, M. Tomi,
P. Virtanen,
and P. J. Hakonen, Nano Lett. 14, 3009
(2014), pMID: 24842236.
[7] T. V. Alencar, M. G. Silva, L. M. Malard,
and A. M.
de Paula, Nano Lett. 14, 5621 (2014), pMID: 25211670,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/nl502163d.
[8] In fact, breaking the mirror symmetry of the graphene
plane means that the momentum conservation in the
out-of-plane direction is removed.
[9] R. H. Telling, C. P. Ewels, A. A. El-Barbary, and M. I.
Heggie, Nat. Mater. 2, 333 (2003).
[10] F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski,
and A. V. Krasheninnikov,
ACS Nano, ACS Nano 5, 26 (2011).
[11] E. Mariani and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100,
076801 (2008).
[12] E. Mariani and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. B 82, 195403
(2010).
[13] F. Wendler, A. Knorr, and E. Malic, Appl. Phys. Lett.
103, 253117 (2013).
[14] F. Wendler and E. Malic, Phys. Status Solidi B 251, 2541
(2014).
[15] J. Maultzsch, S. Reich, C. Thomsen, H. Requardt, and
P. Ordejón, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 075501 (2004).
[16] E. Malic, T. Winzer, E. Bobkin,
and A. Knorr, Phys.
Rev. B 84, 205406 (2011).
[17] A. Politano, F. de Juan, G. Chiarello, and H. A. Fertig,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 075504 (2015).
[18] W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, M. Ruan, M. Sprinkle, X. Li,
Y. Hu, B. Zhang, J. Hankinson, and E. Conrada, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 108, 16900 (2011).
[19] W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, X. Wu, M. Sprinkle, Y. Hu,
M. Ruan, J. A. Stroscio, P. N. First, R. Haddon, B. Piot,
C. Faugeras, M. Potemski, and J.-S. Moon, J. Phys. D:6
Appl. Phys. 43, 374007 (2010).
[20] E. Malic and A. Knorr, Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes:
Ultrafast Optics and Relaxation Dynamics (Wiley-VCH,
2013).
[21] H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of the Opti-
cal and Electronic Properties of Semiconductors (World
Scientiﬁc, 2009).
[22] F. Wendler, A. Knorr, and E. Malic, Nanophotonics 4,
224 (2015).
[23] R. J. Suess, S. Winnerl, H. Schneider, M. Helm, C. Berger,
W. A. de Heer, T. E. Murphy, and M. Mittendorﬀ, ACS
Photonics, ACS Photonics 3, 1069 (2016).
[24] M. Mittendorﬀ, F. Wendler, E. Malic, A. Knorr, M. Orlita,
M. Potemski, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer, H. Schneider,
M. Helm, and S. Winnerl, Nature Phys. 11, 75 (2015).
[25] H. Funk, A. Knorr, F. Wendler, and E. Malic, Phys. Rev.
B 92, 205428 (2015).
[26] M. O. Goerbig, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1193 (2011).
[27] A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S.
Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109
(2009).
[28] E. N. Economou, Green’s Functions in Quantum Physics
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006).
[29] H. Bruus and K. Flensberg, Many-Body Quantum Theory
in Condensed Matter Physics (Oxford University Press,
2009).
[30] F. Wendler, A. Knorr, and E. Malic, Nature Commun.
5, 3703 (2014).
[31] To this end, starting with an initial dephasing Γi,f|0,
a sequence of dephasings Γi,f|1, Γi,f|2, . . . is calculated
where the preceding dephasing Γi,f|l−1 is used to calculate
the dephasing Γi,f|l, respectively, until two consecutive
dephasings are equal.
[32] A. M. R. Baker, J. A. Alexander-Webber, T. Altebaeumer,
and R. J. Nicholas, Phys. Rev. B 85, 115403 (2012).
[33] A. M. R. Baker, J. A. Alexander-Webber, T. Altebaeumer,
S. D. McMullan, T. J. B. M. Janssen, A. Tzalenchuk,
S. Lara-Avila, S. Kubatkin, R. Yakimova, C.-T. Lin, L.-J.
Li, and R. J. Nicholas, Phys. Rev. B 87, 045414 (2013).
[34] M.
Orlita,
C.
Faugeras,
R.
Grill,
A.
Wysmolek,
W. Strupinski, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer, G. Martinez,
and M. Potemski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 216603 (2011).Supplemental material for “Symmetry-breaking supercollisions in Landau-quantized graphene”
Florian Wendler,1, ∗Martin Mittendorﬀ,2, 3 Jacob C. K¨onig-Otto,3, 4 Samuel Brem,1 Claire Berger,5, 6 Walter
A. de Heer,5 Roman B¨ottger,3 Harald Schneider,3 Manfred Helm,3, 4 Stephan Winnerl,3 and Ermin Malic7
1Department of Theoretical Physics, Technical University Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany.
2Institute for Research in Electronics & Applied Physics,
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, United States.
3Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, PO Box 510119, D-01314 Dresden, Germany.
4Technische Universit¨at Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany.
5Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
6Institut N´eel, CNRS-Universit´e Alpes, 38042, Grenoble, France
7Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(Dated: November 5, 2021)
SAMPLE GROWTH AND DOPING
Both multilayered epitaxial graphene (MEG) samples were
grown on the C-terminated (000-1) face of 4H-SiC substrates
with maximum 0.2 degree misorientation by thermal decom-
position of SiC. Two diﬀerent conﬁnement controlled subli-
mation (CCS) [1] furnaces were used, where graphene grows
under the Si vapor in quasi-equilibrium above the SiC crys-
tal at high temperature. The low quality sample was grown at
1440◦C for 18 min on a H2 pre-etched SiC substrate. The high
quality sample was grown directly on an epitaxy ready CMP
polished surface. It was annealed twice at 1400◦C for 60 min,
with a SiO2 decomposition step at 1150◦C for 20 min.
The multilayer epitaxial graphene layers are composed of
a highly doped layer at the interface with SiC, followed by
about three layers of exponentially decreasing doping [2] and
large number (for our samples about 40 - 50 layers) of almost
neutral graphene [3]. The experiments at a photon energy of
75 meV are sensitive to the almost intrinsic layers. Experi-
ments using all combinations of pumping and probing with
σ+ and σ−polarized radiation indicate that both samples fea-
ture slight n-type doping. The Fermi energy (at B = 0) for the
high quality sample is about 10 meV to 15 meV [4], for the
low quality sample ∼28 meV [5].
LONG TIME SCAN
To demonstrate the slow decay time in the high quality sam-
ple, in Fig. S1 we provide the experimental signal for a time
range of up to 1 ns (blue line) which is complemented by an
exponential ﬁt (orange line) and the theoretical result (dashed
black line).
Fig.
S1 shows the result for linear polarized
pumping and probing with σ−-polarized radiation. The plot
conﬁrms the extracted decay time in the order of 1 ns in the
high quality sample in Fig. S1a in the main manuscript. Un-
fortunately, the data is not available for the most simple case
discussed in the main manuscript, i.e. pumping and probing
with σ−-polarized radiation.
RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY
The Raman spectra of both samples are depicted in Fig.
S2.
They are measured with an excitation wavelength of
532 nm.
Both samples feature single-Lorentzian 2D peaks
as expected for electronically decoupled graphene layers [6].
The most prominent indication for the high structural qual-
ity of the MEG samples is the low intensity of the D-peak at
1350 cm−1, which is forbidden in defect-free graphene. In-
deed the high quality sample shows no D-peak at all, showing
the MEG excellent structural quality [7]. The spectrum of the
low quality sample presents a very low D-peak, with an in-
tensity ratio of the G-peak to the D-peak of 20. Note that
the additional peaks observed around the G-peak arise from
the SiC substrate, and are strongly attenuated because of the
large number of graphene layers. A further indication of high
structural quality is the narrow width of the 2D-peak. The full
width at half maximum is (24 ± 2) cm−1 and (56 ± 11) cm−1
for the high quality and the low quality sample, respectively.
The Raman analysis shows that the high quality sample has
a structural quality that is comparable to the purest form of
graphene [8], which is quite remarkable considering the large
number of layers (The Raman spectrum probe them all since
the substrate SiC peaks are visible). The low quality sample,
Figure S1. Diﬀerential transmission for linear polarized pumping
and probing with σ−-polarized radiation, in experiment (blue line),
ﬁt to experiment (orange line), and theory (dashed black line)
arXiv:1801.08463v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  25 Jan 20182
Figure S2. Raman spectra of the two samples.
on the other hand, shows signatures of a reduced structural
quality, although the Raman spectrum still characterizes it as
graphene with very low defect density. Graphene grown by
chemical vapor deposition and transferred to SiO2 is typically
of much lower structural quality [9].
Note that the higher signal-to-noise ratio in the Raman
spectrum of the high quality sample (cf. Fig. S2) results from
a longer integration time that was chosen to enable resolving
even a very tiny D peak if it would be there. The pronounced
diﬀerence of the G/2D ratios is mainly connected to diﬀer-
ences in D-peak width. If we compare the ratios of peak areas,
there is only a 5 % diﬀerence in the ratio of the areas of the G
peak and 2D peaks for the two samples.
DYNAMICS AT ZERO MAGNETIC FIELD
We investigated the carrier dynamics of both samples also
in absence of a magnetic ﬁeld. To this end, the same photon
energy, pump ﬂuence and substrate temperature as for the ex-
periments under Landau quantization was applied. The exper-
iments were performed with linearly polarized radiation with
the polarization of the probe beam being perpendicular to the
polarization of the pump beam. The results are depicted in
Fig. S3. Exactly the same relaxation time of (13 ± 2) ps is
found for the two samples. This is very surprising considering
the fact that their relaxation times in case of Landau quantiza-
tion diﬀer by two orders of magnitude. This observation pro-
vides evidence for a very speciﬁc relaxation channel, which is
opened up in the low quality sample in case of Landau quan-
tization.
Next, we discuss our results with respect to previous stud-
ies of the carrier dynamics in graphene with varied structural
quality. In an early-stage degenerate pump-probe experiment
at a photon energy of 1.5 eV on multilayer epitaxial graphene
on SiC, carrier cooling times between 0.4 ps and 1.7 ps for the
lowest and highest quality sample, respectively, were found
[10].
The much faster relaxation is due to eﬃcient relax-
ation via optical phonons at the high photon energy [11]. The
observed dependence of the cooling time on the defect den-
sity may be explained by the fairly high amount of defects.
Figure S3. Normalized induced transmission for the two samples.
The best sample in this study features a higher intensity ra-
tio of G-peak to D-peak than our low quality sample. In a
more recent study two-color pump-probe experiments have
been performed on graphene with a systematically varied de-
fect concentration [12]. In these experiment a pump photon
energy of 3.1 eV and a probe photon energy of 1.55 eV was
applied. Carrier cooling times ranging from 2.0 ps for pristine
graphene to 0.7 ps for the sample with the highest amount of
defects (intensity ratio of D to G-peak ∼1) were measured.
A large number of diﬀerent samples was investigated in near-
infrared pump terahertz-probe experiments in a very recent
study [13]. This study is closest to our experiment for two
reasons. Firstly, at the low probe photon energy relaxation
via optical phonons is impossible. Consequently the observed
timescales are much longer, in the 10 ps range. Second, even
though many diﬀerent samples were investigated in the study,
they were all of high structural quality as evidenced by a neg-
ligible D-peak in the Raman spectra, hence comparable to our
two samples. Mihnev et al. do not observe diﬀerences in the
relaxation dynamics for samples with slightly diﬀerent struc-
tural quality. This behavior is corroborated by microscopic
theory, which shows that defect related eﬀects are negligible
in this regime. The results of our experiments in absence of
a magnetic ﬁeld are in very good agreement with the ﬁndings
of Mihnev et al [13].
INTENTIONALLY INDUCED DEFECTS BY ION
IRRADIATION
In order to investigate the general role of defects on the
carrier dynamics in Landau quantized graphene, a control ex-
periment using ion irradiation was carried out. In this experi-
ment some areas of the high quality sample, that had an area
of 4 × 5 mm2, were irradiated with C+ ions at an energy of
2 keV. At this low energy, most of the ions are stopped within
the 50 graphene layers and thereby intermixing at the interface
to SiC is avoided. One area of the sample was irradiated with a
dose of 1×1012 cm−2, another one with a dose of 5×1013 cm−2
and a third was kept pristine. Simple simulations, not taking
into account healing eﬀects, provide an upper limit for the3
concentration of generated defects. This is 6 × 1011 cm−2 for
the lower dose. For the higher dose the concentration is 50
times higher. It is known that under these conditions mainly
single and double vacancies are formed [14, 15]. Such point
defects can enhance defect-assisted electron-phonon scatter-
ing, the supercollision process in absence of Landau quanti-
zation [12]. However, since they are not symmetry breaking,
these defects should not result in symmetry-breaking super-
collisions in Landau-quantized graphene.
In Fig. S4a Raman spectra from the three areas are de-
picted. The very small D peak for the pristine graphene, that
is absent in the spectrum depicted in Fig. S2 seems to indicate
a slight aging of the sample over the roughly 5 years that have
passed between the measurements. The induced defects by
ion irradiation are clearly seen in the Raman spectra with the
dose of 1 × 1012 cm−2 (5 × 1013 cm−2) resulting in a G/D peak
ratio of 13 (1.6). Note that even for the low dose, the G/D
peak ratio of 13 is lower than the ratio of 20 found for the low
quality sample that is assumed to contain symmetry-breaking
defects.
Degenerate pump-probe experiments applying σ−polar-
ized pump and probe beams and a photon energy of 75 meV
were carried out in the resonant magnetic ﬁeld of 4.1 T.
Clearly the relaxation time is reduced with increasing amount
of defects.
However, the cooling times remain in the few
100 ps range (cf. Fig. S4b). Even for the case of implanta-
tion with a dose of 5 × 1013 cm−2, the relaxation in the time
window from 30 −300 ps is about 200 ps, i.e. 20 times larger
than for the low quality sample described in the main text
(cf. Fig. 2). Note that at the same time the G/D peak ratio
of the sample implanted with high dose is ∼13 times lower
than for the low quality sample. This is direct evidence for
two facts: Firstly, there is a bottleneck in carrier cooling in
Landau quantized graphene when the levels are spaced non-
resonantly with the optical phonon energies. Relaxation times
in the range for few 100 ps are found even in a sample with a
very large concentration of point defects, so this bottleneck is
very robust. Secondly, the results indicate that the low quality
sample must feature an unusual mechanism that leads to the
very short relaxation time of 10 ps. Finding direct experimen-
tal evidence for the presence of symmetry breaking defects
and understanding their formation during the growth process
are important tasks, which go beyond our present study, in
which we present mainly theory that provides a very strong
indication that rapid relaxation is due to relaxation via out-of-
plane phonons mediated by symmetry-breaking defects. Fur-
ther experimental work is needed to unambiguously prove that
symmetry-breaking supercollisions with ZO phonons are re-
sponsible for the dramatically diﬀerent decay times.
Figure S4. Raman spectra (a) and pump-probe signals (b) obtained
at a magnetic ﬁeld of 4.1 T for the ion-irradiated sample employed in
the control experiment.
DETAILS OF THE THEORY
The disorder averaged (denoted by · · ·, cf.
Ref.
16)
electron-defect matrix element reads
Di, f
2 = Γ2
de
NB
α2
niα2
nf
4
(1)
X
qde
Fni,mi
nf ,mf (qde)

2
+ λ2
i λ2
f
Fni−1,mi
nf −1,m f (qde)

2
,
with the deﬁnition αn(n = 0) =
√
2, αn(n , 0) = 1, the form
factor Fn′m′
nm (q, ϕ) which can be found in Ref. [17], and the
defect-induced dephasing Γde [18]. Note that in order to al-
low the symmetry-breaking supercollisions proposed in this
work, the disorder needs to break the mirror symmetry of the
graphene plane. Consequently, we only consider defects of
that kind, but in general it is conceivable that there are also
defects that aﬀect the dephasing without contributing to su-
percollisions. It would be straightforward to generalize our
approach to this case.
Since the in-plane phonon modes were already described in
detail in Ref. [17], we focus here on the out-of-plane ΓZO-
mode. The corresponding electron-phonon matrix element is
given by [17, 19]
g
ΓZO,qph
i,f

2
= ℏ2v2
FλΓZO
A
α2
niα2
nf
4
(2)
Fni,mi
nf ,mf (qph) + ξiξ f λiλf Fni−1,mi
n f −1,m f (qph)

2
,
where λµ,qph = F2
µ,qph/(Mϵµ,qphv2
F) is the dimensionless cou-
pling strength as deﬁned in Ref.
[20], with the force ex-
erted on electrons upon a deformation (corresponding to the
phonon µ, qph) Fµ,qph and the mass density of graphene M =
7.6×10−8 gcm−2 [21]. The calculation of the coupling strength
of an electron with a single ΓZO-phonon (λΓZO) is not straight-
forward, since this scattering process is forbidden in free-
standing graphene and becomes allowed, only if the symme-
try with respect to out-of-plane deformations is broken [22].
Provided this mirror symmetry is broken, for example due to
the presence of a substrate or due to an external electric ﬁeld,
a deformation in one perpendicular direction with respect to4
the graphene plane gives a diﬀerent energy contribution to
electrons than the same deformation in the reverse direction.
This means that a deformation in one out-of plane direction dz
leads to a force

Fx, Fy, Fz

being exerted on the electrons in
graphene, which does not simply equalize the mirrored force,
i.e.

Fx, Fy, −Fz

, under the reverse deformation −dz. There-
fore, the coupling strength λΓZO is determined by that force
and it depends on the concrete origin of the mechanism break-
ing the mirror symmetry. We estimate the coupling strength to
be λΓZO = 0.0435, a value recently measured for graphene on
Pt(111) by Politano et al. [23] in the ﬁrst experiment demon-
strating a ﬁrst-order coupling of electrons and out-of-plane-
phonons in graphene [24]. While this is certainly a rough es-
timate, the exact value of the coupling strength is not vital
for the novel supercollision we are proposing, since the strong
impact of the out-of-plane phonons mainly relies on their fa-
vorable energy.
Note that out-of-plane acoustic (ZA) phonons have a very
low energy at the Γ point rendering them ineﬃcient for the
decay between the lowest Landau levels (where the Landau
level distance is the largest). ZA phonons at the K point, have
a larger energy and they could result in a faster decay in our
theory, which would indicate that the mirror-breaking defect
concentration is lower than assumed (but still of the same or-
der). However, we want to stress that the message of the paper
is unaﬀected by this phonon mode.
PHONON SPECTRUM IN MULTILAYER GRAPHENE
As mentioned above, it has been shown that the individ-
ual graphene layers are essentially decoupled in terms of their
electronic band structure due to small in-plane rotations of the
diﬀerent layers [6]. However, as Ref. 25 suggests, this is not
necessarily true for the phonon spectrum. The paper theoreti-
cally investigates the phonon dispersion for twisted graphene
layers, where the increased unit cell size leads to the emer-
gence of a large number of hybrid folded phonon modes. This
provides an alternative explanation for the dramatically diﬀer-
ent decay times in the two samples we investigated: A diﬀer-
ent twisting angle leads to diﬀerent phonon energies, so that a
hybrid folded phonon mode in one of the samples could be in
resonance with the inter-Landau level transition under investi-
gation, while this is not the case in the other sample. However,
both multilayered epitaxial graphene samples were grown on
the C-terminated (000-1) face of 4H-SiC substrates. For these
samples it is known that the diﬀerent graphene sheets can have
the rotation angles 30◦(R30) or 30 ± 2.204◦(R2±), where
R30 and R2± graphene sheets are interleaved to produce a
high density of R30/R2± fault pairs instead of occurring as
AB stacked R30 or R2± isolated domains [26]. Therefore,
the structure of both samples with respect to the rotation an-
gles between the graphene sheets is expected to be the same,
hence, the explanation of our experimental results via diﬀer-
ent rotation angles in the two samples is unlikely to be true.
Moreover, our results do not rely on the exact phonon en-
ergies, but on the fact that the optical in-plane phonon en-
ergies are too high and the acoustic in-plane phonon ener-
gies are too low to explain the fast decay in the low quality
sample, while the ΓZO-mode has an intermediate energy in
the range of the relevant inter-Landau level transition. From
the observed extremely slow decay in the high quality sample
we can conclude that phonon modes with energies ﬁtting the
inter-Landau level transition under investigation are absent in
this sample, hence, they should also be absent in the low qual-
ity sample.
∗ﬂorian.wendler@fu-berlin.de
[1] W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, M. Ruan, M. Sprinkle, X. Li, Y. Hu,
B. Zhang, J. Hankinson, and E. Conrada, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
108, 16900 (2011).
[2] D. Sun, Z.-K. Wu, C. Divin, X. Li, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer,
P. N. First,
and T. B. Norris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 157402
(2008).
[3] M. Orlita, C. Faugeras, P. Plochocka, P. Neugebauer, G. Mar-
tinez, D. K. Maude, A.-L. Barra, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger, W. A.
de Heer,
and M. Potemski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 267601
(2008).
[4] J. C. K¨onig-Otto, M. Mittendorﬀ, T. Winzer, F. Kadi, E. Malic,
A. Knorr, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer, A. Pashkin, H. Schneider,
M. Helm, and S. Winnerl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 087401 (2016).
[5] M. Mittendorﬀ, F. Wendler, E. Malic, A. Knorr, M. Orlita,
M. Potemski, C. Berger, W. a. de Heer, H. Schneider, M. Helm,
and S. Winnerl, Nat. Phys. 11, 75 (2014).
[6] C. Faugeras, A. Nerri`ere, M. Potemski, A. Mahmood, E. Du-
jardin, C. Berger, and W. A. de Heer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 92,
011914 (2008).
[7] W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, X. Wu, M. Sprinkle, Y. Hu, M. Ruan,
J. A. Stroscio, P. N. First, R. Haddon, B. Piot, C. Faugeras,
M. Potemski,
and J.-S. Moon, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 43,
374007 (2010).
[8] S. Berciaud, S. Ryu, L. E. Brus, and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett. 9,
346 (2009).
[9] D. S. Lee, C. Riedl, B. Krauss, K. von Klitzing, U. Starke, and
J. H. Smet, Nano Lett. 8, 4320 (2008).
[10] J. M. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, M. Chandrashekhar, F. Rana,
and M. G. Spencer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 042116 (2008).
[11] S. Winnerl, M. Orlita, P. Plochocka, P. Kossacki, M. Potemski,
T. Winzer, E. Malic, A. Knorr, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger, W. A.
de Heer, H. Schneider,
and M. Helm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,
237401 (2011).
[12] T. V. Alencar, M. G. Silva, L. M. Malard, and A. M. de Paula,
Nano Lett. 14, 5621 (2014).
[13] M. T. Mihnev, F. Kadi, C. J. Divin, T. Winzer, S. Lee, C.-H.
Liu, Z. Zhong, C. Berger, W. a. de Heer, E. Malic, A. Knorr,
and T. B. Norris, Nat. Commun. 7, 11617 (2016).
[14] O. Lehtinen, J. Kotakoski, A. V. Krasheninnikov, A. Tolvanen,
K. Nordlund, and J. Keinonen, Phys. Rev. B 81, 153401 (2010).
[15] E. H. Åhlgren, J. Kotakoski, and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys.
Rev. B 83, 115424 (2011).
[16] E. Akkermans and G. Montambaux, Mesoscopic Physics of
Electrons and Photons (Cambridge University Press, 2007).
[17] F. Wendler, A. Knorr,
and E. Malic, Nanophotonics 4, 224
(2015).5
[18] H. Funk, A. Knorr, F. Wendler, and E. Malic, Phys. Rev. B 92,
205428 (2015).
[19] E. Mariani and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. B 82, 195403 (2010).
[20] D. M. Basko, S. Piscanec, and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Rev. B 80,
165413 (2009).
[21] E. Malic, T. Winzer, E. Bobkin, and A. Knorr, Phys. Rev. B 84,
205406 (2011).
[22] E. Mariani and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 076801
(2008).
[23] A. Politano, F. de Juan, G. Chiarello, and H. A. Fertig, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 075504 (2015).
[24] In fact, the paper states that λΓZO = 0.087. However, within our
notation it should be λΓZO = 0.087/2.
[25] A. I. Cocemasov, D. L. Nika, and A. A. Balandin, Phys. Rev.
B 88, 035428 (2013).
[26] J. Hass,
F. Varchon,
J. E. Mill´an-Otoya,
M. Sprinkle,
N. Sharma, W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, P. N. First, L. Magaud,
and E. H. Conrad, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 125504 (2008).