Seeing Structural Evolution of Organic Molecular Nano-crystallites
Using 4D Scanning Confocal Electron Diffraction
Mingjian Wua,∗, Christina Harreißa, Colin Ophusb, Erdmann Spieckera,∗∗
aInstitute of Micro- and Nanostructure Research & Center for Nanoanalysis and Electron Microscopy (CENEM),
Department of Materials Science, Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Cauerstraße 3, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany.
bNational Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, USA, 94720
Abstract
Direct observation of organic molecular nanocrystals and their evolution using electron microscopy is extremely challenging, due to
their radiation sensitivity and complex structure. Here, we introduce 4D-scanning confocal electron diffraction (4D-SCED), which
enables direct in situ observation of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) thin ﬁlms. 4D-SCED combines confocal electron microscopy with
a pixelated detector to record focused spot-like diffraction patterns with high angular resolution, using an order of magnitude lower
dose than previous methods. We apply it to study an active layer in organic solar cells, namely DRCN5T:PC71BM BHJ thin ﬁlms.
Structural details of DRCN5T nano-crystallites oriented both in- and out-of-plane are imaged at 5 nm resolution and dose budget of
~5 e−/ ˚A2. We use in situ annealing to observe the growth of the donor crystals, evolution of the crystal orientation, and progressive
enrichment of PC71BM at interfaces. This highly dose-efﬁcient method opens new possibilities for studying beam sensitive soft
materials.
Keywords: 4D-STEM, in situ, organic molecular crystals, organic solar cells
The properties of organic semiconductors and device perfor-
mance, particularly in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic so-
lar cells, is dictated by the nano-crystalline structure and mor-
phology. This is due to the high anisotropy of opto-electronic
properties of the constituent molecules or polymers, and their
directional assembly into (semi-)crystals. The orientation rela-
tionship between molecule, crystal and morphological features,
interface character of donor/acceptor components, degree of
net-work percolation of the nano-scaled carrier transport chan-
nels in BHJ therefore govern the device performance, which all
evolve sensitively depending on the processing conditions [1–
5]. However, revealing the nanoscale structures at high spatial
resolution using electron microscopy methods is challenged by
radiation sensitivity of these soft materials [6, 7] and the com-
plexity of their structures. Diffraction imaging, also called four
dimensional-scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-
STEM) [8], or nano-beam diffraction (NBD), with a small con-
vergence angle α has recently demonstrated its power to reveal
a multitude of nanoscale structural details in a very broad range
of material samples, e.g. in refs [9–11]. Mapping the orienta-
tion of π-stacking in organic semiconductors molecular crystals
was recently demonstrated under cryogenic temperatures [12],
opening a new application ﬁeld in beam sensitive soft materials
[13]. Cryo-freezing the samples is one of the general strategies
to slow down the structural damage and extend the dose toler-
ance by up to an order of magnitude before the structures break
∗Corresponding author
∗∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: mingjian.wu@fau.de (Mingjian Wu),
erdmann.spiecker@fau.de (Erdmann Spiecker)
down by the incident electron beam [7, 12].
Working at cryogenic temperature, however, makes in situ
observation of thermal treatment induced structural evolution
more difﬁcult. In 4D-STEM, pixelated detectors/cameras are
used to record the full 2D diffraction pattern at each probed
sample position, allowing full reciprocal space details of the
scattered intensities to be analyzed afterwards. Radical devel-
opments have pushed the limits of detection efﬁciency and cam-
era speed [13], as well as ever growing computational and soft-
ware algorithms. The standard NBD setup available on most
TEMs, is however, neither optimized for dose efﬁciency nor for
angular resolution. This is because a focused probe is interact-
ing with a small sample region (high dose under a given probe
current) and far ﬁeld diffraction disks spread the signal over
many pixels of the detector/camera (Fig. 1a). In applications of
diffraction imaging, it is the position of Bragg reﬂections, their
summed intensities, and their in-plane orientations which pro-
vide rich information on the crystalline phase [9], strain state
[10, 11] and orientation [12] of the underlying diffracting lat-
tices. The distribution of intensity in the beam disks does not
typically contain additional information, but rather spreads the
already low signal to many detector pixels. This lowers the
SNR for a given detector, complicates the post-acquisition pro-
cessing [13], and reduces the angular resolution because of disk
overlap, when study large unit cell samples such as organic
crystals (typically few nanometers). For example, the Bragg
angle for a 2 nm lattice spacing is only 0.6 mrad using 200
keV incident electrons, comparable to the probe semiangle in
many NBD experiments.
To mitigate the challenge of our limited dose budget, we
October 7, 2021
arXiv:2110.02373v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  5 Oct 2021Figure 1: (a) Typical STEM setup where detector(s) is(are) located at far-ﬁeld.
(b) Defocusing the probe mitigate limited dose budget for radiative sensitive
samples. (c) Scheme of a sim-pliﬁed optic path to realize scanning confocal
electron diffrac-tion. (d) A simple geometric consideration of spatial and an-
gular resolution.
can defocus the probe at the cost of spatial resolution, or use
a shorter camera length, i.e. apply angular under-sampling to
enhance SNR. Both approaches however would not improve
the angular resolution of the diffraction patterns. Reducing the
convergence angle is another possible solution, which could be
achieved by using (1) condenser zoom, (2) customized small
probe-deﬁning apertures as recently explored [13], or (3) an ob-
jective lens with longer focal length, e.g. condenser mini lens
in low-mag (LM-)STEM or Lorentz STEM [14]. Condenser
zoom can lower the convergence semi-angle to 0.5–1 mrad [15],
which can still cause disk overlap for lattice planes of ~1.2–
2.4 nm distances using a 200 keV primary beam. Customized
apertures require replacement of the standard apertures, reduc-
ing the ﬂexibility of the instrument. In addition, cutting down
the convergence angle with a smaller aperture by a factor of n
lead to lowering of current by a factor of n2 which may result in
a very low beam current which can make the experiments chal-
lenging to perform. Using a long focal length for the objective
lenses suffers from very large aberrations [14], as probe correc-
tion of these weak lens are not routinely available. Furthermore,
using a weak objective lens means a long camera length, caus-
ing diffraction patterns that produce signals beyond the cam-
era/detector ﬁeld of view. Dedicated alignment of the projec-
tion system may shrink the effective camera length. However,
medium to high angle scattering would still be blocked by the
differential pump aperture in the projection chamber. There-
fore, for diffraction imaging studies of soft materials, we want
to develop alternative ﬂexible methods, optimized for both dose
efﬁciency and angular resolution, while retaining sufﬁcient spa-
tial resolution.
Here, we introduce a new diffraction imaging modality
which, in contrast to 4D-STEM, uses the imaging mode of the
microscope rather than the diffraction mode. This confocal op-
tical setting [16, 17], albeit differing from typical scanning con-
focal electron microscopy (SCEM), is combined with a small
convergence angle α and a large sample defocus z to obtain
sharp diffraction spots. We call this technique 4D scanning
confocal electron diffraction (4D-SCED) and use it to study
the structure of molecular nano-crystallites in BHJ thin ﬁlms
composed of DRCN5T:PC71BM. We show that the 4D-SCED
method has (1) high angular resolution for investigating the rich
structural information of the molecular crystals, and (2) it can
reduce dose by about an order of magnitude compared to the
standard NBD setup used in many 4D-STEM applications. We
further demonstrate that 4D-SCED even enables in situ moni-
toring of structural evolution and growth of nano-crystallites at
elevated temperatures.
In a diffraction limited STEM setup, where small con-
vergence angles are applied, and lens aberration can be well
omitted, spatial and angular resolution is well described by the
Abbe equation:
d ≈
λ
2sinα
(1)
In a typical NBD setup, the sample plane is coincident with
plane of probe with sharply focused probe of size d at the left
side of the equation; and detector is at far ﬁeld, or conjugate
plane of the aperture, which deﬁnes α, thus disk patterns are
detected (Fig. 1a). Due to the reciprocal relationship, one can
optimize spatial or angular resolution on either side of the equa-
tion for a given incident electron wavelength. In view of the re-
ciprocal relationship, exchanging the planes of probing and de-
tection would allow for an extended illumination area (reduced
dose) and sharply focused diffraction spots (high SNR and an-
gular resolution) on a standard instrument without customized
apertures.
Examining the beam path in the case of a defocused probe
(obtained by raising the sample, Fig. 1b), the cross-over of the
direct and Bragg-diffracted beams are generated between the
sample and the far-ﬁeld diffraction pattern. Detection of these
cross-over points can be easily realized using a confocal optics
setting (Fig. 1c). In this setup, the detector plane is set to the
confocal plane which is conjugate to the cross-over pattern (fo-
cal plane), i.e., the diffraction/intermediate lens is working in an
imaging mode. Focused diffraction information is then formed
at the stable confocal plane. Lowering the sample relative to the
beam focus can also create a diffraction pattern at the confocal
plane, but the pattern is rotated by 180◦. Scanning (shifting)
the probe over the sample creates a 2D real space image grid,
therefore de-scan of the probe after the imaging lens is required
to stabilize the image of probe (and thus also the diffraction
patterns) on the detection plane (Fig. 1c). This requirement
is typical for scanning confocal electron microscopy (SCEM)
[16]. Since it is the diffraction information which is of interest,
and the full diffraction pattern is recorded in 4D datasets, we
2call this setup 4D scanning confocal electron diffraction (4D-
SCED). A similar optical setting which can obtain spot diffrac-
tion patterns in TEM (without scanning, and thus not spatially
resolved) was proposed by Midgley [18] and Morniroli et al.
[19]. In both cases, spatial resolution and dose efﬁciency was
not considered, and a large convergence angle (up to a few de-
grees) and large defocus (tens of µm to mm) were applied. 4D-
SCED in contrast uses a small convergence angle and appropri-
ate defocus value to balance spatial and angular resolution, as
will be discussed in the following.
We use a simple geometric model (Fig. 1d) to examine the
experimental parameters and discuss the achievable spatial and
angular resolution.
As illustrated, the diffraction “spots” in
SCED are not identical to that of real far ﬁeld pattern, e.g.,
selected area electron diffraction (SAED) using parallel illumi-
nation, due to the intrinsic z-sensitivity of scattering signals in
confocal setup [20]. The separation of the diffraction informa-
tion, g ∼zθB (θB is the Bragg angle), is dependent on the defo-
cus z, while the spread of the diffraction spots depends on the
coherent length along the sample normal direction and can be
estimated geometrically to be in the order of tθB, for a sample
with thickness t. At defocus values comparable to sample thick-
ness, the complete wave-optical simulation and full dynam-
ical beam-specimen interaction should be considered, which
has been explored in detail with the goal of extracting high-
resolution 3D information in SCEM, e.g. in refs [17, 21]. To
obtain sharp spot patterns for nanoscale crystallography studies,
we want to suppress the diffraction information between the pri-
mary beam and the diffraction beam, and therefore the spread of
the diffraction spots should be far smaller than the separation,
giving the condition z ≫t. In addition, a homogeneously thin,
ﬂat sample without tilt/bending is desirable in order to position
a region of interest at the same defocus z. For a typical TEM
specimen with t < 100 nm, a defocus z > 2 µm already results
in a sharp spot diffraction pattern (cf. supporting information
Fig. S1). For a given defocus, the spatial resolution is gov-
erned by the interaction area of the probe which is determined
approximately by the convergence semi-angle α and defocus z
via (Fig. 1d)
∆R ≈zα
Therefore, at a given defocus z, smaller convergence angle α
is preferred to gain higher spatial resolution. For small probe
convergence, the probe size d at focus is limited by diffrac-
tion via the Abbe relationship given in Eq. 1.
The angular
resolution can then be estimated to be on the order of d/z
[18]. For a 200 keV primary beam energy (λ = 2.504 pm)
and a convergence semi-angle of α = 1 mrad, a probe size of
~1.2 nm can be achieved. With defocus set to z = 5 µm, a spa-
tial resolution of ~5 nm and angular resolution of ~0.24 mrad
would be expected. A more quantitative insight requires wave-
optical simulation, which will be addressed in a follow up work.
However, the ultimate achievable spatial resolution of beam-
sensitive samples is typically determined by the available dose
budget and detection efﬁciency, as well as speed of the used
camera (cf. method section).
With 4D-SCED, we have characterized the active layer of a
Figure 2: (a) molecular and crystal structure of donner component DRCN5T
and acceptor component PC71BM. (b) (elastically ﬁltered) selection area elec-
tron diffraction pattern from a sample region of 3.5 µm across. The inset shows
an indexed single diffraction pattern of a face-on DRCN5T crystalline domain
extracted from a SCED dataset (cf. Fig. 3). (c) azimuth integrated SAED as
function of the accumulative dose. Scale bars: 2 mrad. Details in text.
BHJ solar cell and show the highly improved dose efﬁciency
and angular resolution compared to 4D-STEM (or NBD) un-
der identical illumination condition (and thus dose budget).
For this purpose, we choose a BHJ ﬁlm comprising a blend
of a small molecule quinquethiophene-based electron donor
DRCN5T and a fullerene acceptor PC71BM which has been
treated by solvent vapor annealing (SVA) in CS2 for 840s. So-
lar cells based on this system has been shown to have high efﬁ-
ciency and stability [3]. Moreover, the nanomorphology and
crystallinity show a clear correlation to device performance,
which has been shown to depend sensitively on the process-
ing conditions [2]. In a recent structural analysis using graz-
ing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), the unit
cell structure of the small molecule crystal DRCN5T was de-
termined, and a coexistence of (molecular) face-on and edge-
on crystalline domains were deduced [22].
The molecular
orientation, particularly the π-stacking orientation, within the
nanoscale percolating ﬁber network is the key to understand
the transport properties. However, the important question of
how the molecular orientation (which can be determined on av-
erage from other techniques such as GIWAX) locally relates to
the nano-morphology of the donor-acceptor blend and how both
evolve upon processing have not yet been answered.
Figure 2a shows the chemical structure of PC71BM and
3Figure 3: Comparison of the raw diffraction signal intensity of SCED and NBD under identical dose conditions and spatial and angular sampling from fresh areas
of a solvent vapor annealed DRCN5T:PC71BM blend sample. (a) SCEM-ADF image simultaneously ob-tained during the SCED data acquisition. (b) STEM-ADF
image simultaneously obtained during NBD data acquisition. Single raw diffraction patterns extracted from the marked dots in (a) and (b) representing the edge-on
and face-on DRCN5T nano-crystallites respectively, are extracted and show as insets below. (c) Line proﬁles comparing the signal to noise of raw patterns represent
more than an order of magnitude higher SNR, whole pattern signal analysis shown in Fig. S3.
DRCN5T, respectively. The in-plane tiling and out-of-plane
stacking of the small molecule is also schematically depicted.
Figure 2b present an elastically ﬁltered SAED (cf. method)
pattern of the sample acquired at room temperature (RT) with
a total electron dose of ~0.8 e−/ ˚A2. In the experiment, the
diffraction rings fade out very rapidly. A time series (and thus
accumulated dose) of the SAED was recorded, and the azimuth
integrated proﬁles as function of accumulative dose is plotted
in Fig. 2c.
While the in-plane molecule planes, i.e., {100}
diffraction ring at 0.55 nm−1, survived beyond ~15 e−/ ˚A2, the
π-stacking, i.e., {010} diffraction ring at 2.65 nm−1, can only
withstand a beam dose below ~5 e−/ ˚A2. We note that this crit-
ical dose is comparable to that of Polyethylene and is orders
of magnitude more vulnerable than metal organic frame-works,
which can tolerate ~100–1000 e−/ ˚A2, as measured in con-
trolled experiments [7]. The individual diffraction rings follow
different trends upon beam bombardment that reveal the time
evolution of structural damage. It is apparent that almost all
in-plane diffraction rings {h0l} expand to higher values while
the {010} diffraction ring shrinks, indicating that the crystal
order of the π-stacking expands immediately upon beam bom-
bardment while the in-plane order of the molecule is gradu-
ally shrinking. Working under cryogenic temperature helps to
preserve the crystalline order of the small molecule to about 4
times the total electron dose compared to RT (Fig. S2). How-
ever, ice formation was observed (in both SAED and real space
imaging) upon illumination. This disturbed the analysis of the
native structure of the sample. The SCED and NBD 4D-STEM
experiments were therefore performed at RT.
To illustrate the enhanced SNR of 4D-SCED compared to
NBD 4D-STEM using standard apertures, we compare the
datasets acquired from the same sample at neighboring fresh
areas, under identical dose conditions. We emphasize here the
smallest available convergence of 0.85 mrad on our instrument
was applied. Figure 3a–b show the sample areas and representa-
tive raw diffraction patterns extracted from the marked regions
using 4D-SCED (Fig. 3a) and NBD 4D-STEM (Fig. 3b), re-
spectively. Each of the two patterns represent edge-on (color
dot) and face-on crystallite (gray dot). In the face-on case the
spots from the {h0l} planes, separated by angles < 1 mrad are
clearly resolved in the SCED mode showing very high signal in-
tensity, while they are heavily overlapping in the NBD mode.
Apart from the disc overlap, the SNR is much inferior to that in
SCED. With customized smaller apertures, thus smaller beam
disks, more concentrated diffraction signals are expected, and
the difference would be less striking. At same beam ﬂux, the
difference of SNR will dependent on the exact shape of probe
proﬁle and electron-sample interaction circle in the respective
setups. The line intensity proﬁles from the NDB and SCED
data are extracted along the blue and red lines, respectively,
and are shown in Fig. 3c. The dashed lines compare data from
the edge-on domains while solid lines compare the data from
face-on domains. Obviously, almost all diffraction peaks in
4D-SCED show an order-of-magnitude higher intensity com-
pared to NBD. This is most prominently revealed by the {603}
peaks which are clearly visible in SCED, while in NDB they
are buried in the noise ﬂoor. Comparing the SNR from the
whole maps (cf.
Fig.
S3) reveals an average enhancement
of the peak intensity by an order-of-magnitude in 4D-SCED.
Since the noise level (~10 counts in current case) is intrinsic
to the camera, the SNR level in SCED is therefore about an
order-of-magnitude higher than NDB under the applied acqui-
sition conditions. This means under same detectability criteria
of our camera, SCED requires much less dose for Bragg peak
detection, corresponding to higher dose efﬁciency.
With its high angular resolution, the patterns acquired via
SCED enables mapping of the orientation of nano-crystallites
not only in edge-on (large diffraction angles) but also in face-on
orientation (small diffraction angles). Furthermore, the sharp
diffraction spots in SCED can be used to locally analyze the
crystallographic structure of individual nano-crystallites, which
4Figure 4: Visualization of the orientation of donor nano-crystallites and distribution of the PC71BM acceptor. Scheme (a) uses a color wheel method to encode the
edge-on domain orientation at a probed location; (b) demonstrates our ability to determine the grain orientation of the face-on domains. (c) Visualization of the
whole scanned ﬁeld of view. Insets on the right are raw dif-fraction patterns extracted from the white dots. With virtual annual aperture including only the angular
range of PC71BM in each diffraction pattern, the location of the acceptor is shown in (d). Scale bars: 500 nm in (a) and (c); 2 mrad in insets of (c).
is more difﬁcult in the comparable NBD experiments.
To
demonstrate this, the inset in Fig. 2b shows an indexed SCED
pattern extracted from a face-on domain, which agrees well
to that obtained from GIWAX studies [22]. Since the charge
carrier transport properties of molecular crystals are highly
anisotropic, the orientation of the molecular crystals in the do-
mains and the micrometer scale percolation of the domains are
critical to pinpoint the device performance. Figure 4 visual-
izes the orientation of edge-on crystal domains using the color
wheel method, and the location of the face-on domains are dis-
played as superimposed grayscale maps. The short color seg-
ments represent the backbone of DRCN5T molecules, which
is perpendicular to the {010} diffraction g-vectors (schemat-
ically shown in Fig. 4a). It is now clear that the π-stacking
of the DRCN5T molecules is aligned along the long axes of
the nanoscale ﬁber structures, and the π-stacking plane normal,
i.e., ⟨010⟩direction, along the short axis of ﬁbers. In this sam-
ple (SVA treated in CS2 for 840s), the face-on domains cover
roughly circular areas ranging from a few tens up to a sev-
eral hundred nanometers in size. Within a face-on domain, the
molecular crystals show tilted and twisted diffraction patterns
(top-right insets in Fig. 4c) indicating either a strong bending of
the domain or the existence of sub-grains and grain boundaries.
Furthermore, successive raw diffraction patterns across the in-
terface of edge-on domains reveal that PC71BM is enriched
mainly at the donor interface. This is best visualized in the
(virtual) annual dark ﬁeld image using the diffraction informa-
tion characteristic to PC71BM, i.e., between 1.8 and 2.3 nm−1,
in Fig. 4d. We note that mapping the PC71BM was not feasible
using a simple virtual aperture method due to the much inferior
angular resolution and overlapping diffraction information. In
samples which have undergone SVA using CHCl3 as the sol-
vent, similar ﬁber-like edge-on domains were observed but the
face-on domains also resemble a ﬁber-like shape (cf. Fig. S5).
Considering that the DRCN5T molecule has a ﬂat π-conjugate
plane and its ﬂat tiling into crystalline grains, electron wave-
function overlapping along the molecule out-of-plane direction,
i.e., the molecular crystal [010] direction, is not likely [16]. The
high-mobility direction of charge carrier transfer is dominated
by pathways in the crystal a-c plane, which is determined to
coincident with the long axes of the ﬁber.
Finally, we use 4D-SCED to study the structural evolution
of DRCN5T:PC71BM during annealing at elevated tempera-
tures by in situ heating the sample thin ﬁlm in the vacuum of
TEM. Figure 5a show the temperature proﬁle applied during
the experiment. 4D-SCED datasets were recorded sequentially
with only few seconds between scans, to move the sample to a
nearby fresh (un-illuminated) region. Figure 5b–f show visual-
izations of the sample morphology and orientation at different
thermal annealing steps. The as-casted samples show already
a certain degree of π-stacking ordering, but barely any face-on
domains. Very small (< 50 nm long) edge-on domains were
visible, having a rod-like shape in projection. The acceptor
component PC71BM appears homogeneous. After the sample
have been annealed under 100◦C for ∼8 min, a few tiny face-
on domains spanning only 3–4 probed pixels (15—20 nm) start
to emerge. Here, the growth of the edge-on domains in size
is not yet obvious. After raising the temperature to 120◦C and
holding for about 8 min, growth of both edge-on and face on
domains were observed, which is accompanied by phase sepa-
ration of the PC71BM. Raising the temperature again to 140◦C
and holding 8 min, the edge-on domains become sharper and
enrichment of PC71BM towards the edge-on DRCN5T domains
were observed. Finally, after the sample has been held at 160◦C
for about 10 mins, the edge-on domains grow to an apparent
length of 300-–500 nm and large face-on domains also appear.
Further annealing does not result in additional growth, which is
likely due to the completed phase separation and depletion of
5Figure 5: Observing the structural evolution upon thermal annealing of DRCN5T:PCBM thin ﬁlm in the TEM. (a) Temperature proﬁle applied in the experiment.
The red brackets with (b) – (f) indicate the time (of about 2 minutes each) spent on the SCED data acuisition. The data at each stage is visualized in (b)—(f) with
the same scheme used in Fig. 4. Scale bars: 200 nm.
the small molecules. Interestingly, during the growth of ﬁber-
like edge-on crystalline domains, the aspect ratio about 3–4
seem to remain throughout the entire thermal annealing pro-
cessing. With the observed crystallographic orientation rela-
tionship to the ﬁber morphology, this indicates the growth of
the nano-crystallites must be faster in the crystallographic a-c
plane, and much slower expanding along the π-stacking ⟨010⟩
direction. This further hint that the growth (attachment of new
molecules to crystalline seeds) via out-of-plane π-electron in-
teraction is weaker than the in-plane interaction in this materials
system.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated 4D-SCED as a highly
dose-efﬁcient and high angular resolution diffraction imaging
method. Under optimized acquisition parameters, we observed
the annealing-induced growth and structural evolution of nano-
crystallites at sub-5 nm spatial resolution, under a dose budget
of ~5 e−/ ˚A2. When coupled to state-of-the-art high DQE de-
tectors and more advanced data mining algorithms to extract
subtle signals out of the large datasets like those used in NBD
studies, we expect further improvements in the dose efﬁciency.
We believe this new 4D-STEM experimental setup will open
new possibilities in the study of nano-crystallography of soft
materials.
Materials and methods
Sample preparation.
The bulk heterojunction thin ﬁlms were fabricated by a spin-coating
process on ITO-coated (thickness: 350 nm to 400 nm) glass sub-
strates (1.0×1.0 in2, Hans Weidner GmbH, N¨urnberg Germany). Pre-
structured ITO coated glass substrates were subsequently cleaned in
acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each.
After drying, the
substrates were bladed with 40 nm poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios P VP Al 4083, Her-
aeus, Hanau, Germany). The DRCN5T bulk ﬁlms were spin-coated
(1500 rpm) under inert gas atmosphere from the solutions of DRCN5T
(purity ≥99%, 1-Material Inc., Dorval, Canada) and PC71BM (pu-
rity ≥99%, Solenne B.V., Groningen, Netherlands) (1:0.8 wt.%) in
chloroform leading to a ﬁlm thickness of about 80 nm as estimated
by a proﬁlometer. The DRCN5T and PC71BM solutions were stirred
at 40◦C and 150 rpm before mixing and spin-coating. For the SVA
post-processing procedure, the samples were loaded in the middle of a
closed Petri dish containing 120 µl of carbon disulﬁde (CS2) solvent.
Electron Microscopy.
Energy ﬁltered selected area electron diffraction experiments were
performed on a ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc (TFS) monochromated, dou-
ble Cs corrected Titan Themis microscope operating at 300 kV, and
NBD 4D-STEM and 4D-SCED on a TFS probe corrected Spectra mi-
croscope equiped with a X-CFEG gun and operated at 200 kV. The
Themis is equiped with a regular Ceta (Scintilator coupled CMOS)
camera capable to run at a maximum frame rate of
35 fps @
512 × 512 pixels with dynamic range of about 13-bit (operated via
6TIA software), and the Spectra is coupled to a high sensitivity Ceta-
S camera with maximum speed of 300 fps @ 512 × 512 pixels with
dynamic range of about 12-bit (operated via Velox). For NBD, the op-
tics were set to micro-probe STEM mode, with the smallest standard
50 µm C2 aperture and at the limit of convergence zoom. The smallest
achievable convergence semi-angle are calibrated to be α = 0.7 mrad
(on the Themis) and α = 0.85 mrad (on the Spectra), respectively. On
both microscopes, we noticed the factory alignment displays wrong
convergence angle almost half of our calibrated values. To reach the
confocal diffraction condition, basic column alignment of micro-probe
STEM (at the smallest α) were performed ﬁrst, then diffraction lens
was switched to imaging mode. Image magniﬁcation is ﬁrst set to a
high value, ∼100 kx, to conﬁrm that the confocal plane is properly
reached, which is done by going through focus of the probe-deﬁning
(i.e, C3) lens and ﬁnd the minimum size of the probe. After this point,
defocusing is achieved only done via moving sample up and down.
The magniﬁcation of diffraction pattern will change upon shifting the
sample, give full ﬂexibility to tune/balance of the desired spatial and
angular resolution. For a given defocus (i.e., sample offset) value,
the image magniﬁcation is set so to appropriately cover the range of
diffraction vectors of interest on the camera. The scan and de-scan
pivot points were carefully aligned. Finally the shape of probe is de-
termined by the aberrations of the probe-forming lens, and distortions
of the diffraction pattern can be corrected by carefully aligning the
objective imaging lens (cf. Fig. S7).
4D datasets acquisition due to dose limited resolution.
In all experiments, cameras were operated at their highest speed and
other acquisition parameters (probe current, dwell time, defocus and
scanning pixel distance) were estimated to keep both total and insta-
neous dose budget well below 10 e−/ ˚A2. To estimate the dose limited
resolution in a scanning probe experiment, we can use instaneous dose
at any probing point
D
e−
˚A2

= Ip ·10−12 [C/s]·6.24·1018 
e−
·tpx ·10−12 [s]
π ·∆R2  ˚A2
with Ip probe current (in pA), tpx dwell time at each pixel (in ms) and D
dose budget (in e−/ ˚A2) that can be evaluated from SAED experiments,
to be
∆R
 ˚A

≈45
q
Ip [pA]·tpx [ms]/D

e−/ ˚A2
.
Considering the experiments performed on the Titan Themis platform,
inserting the fastest camera frame time (roughly equals to the dwell
time) tpx = 13.5 ms and dose bugest D = 5 e−/ ˚A2, a dose limited
resolution of ∆R ≈74 ˚A is obtainable when setting probe current to
Ip = 1 pA. With the smallest available convergence angle on our mi-
croscope under mirco-probe mode α = 0.7 mrad, a defocus value
z > ∆R/α ≈10 µm is needed. On the Spectra platform (smallest
α = 0.85 mrad) at the same dose budget of D = 5 e−/ ˚A2 and probe
current of Ip = 1 pA, with shorter dwell time tpx = 3.5 ms, spatial res-
olution ∆R ≈38 ˚A is possible. To achieve this condition, a defocus
value z > ∆R/α ≈4.5 µm is required. The scan pixel distance (sam-
pling size) is set to slightly larger than the abovementioned resolution
limit. For in situ experiments, it is important to balance spatial res-
olution required to reveal small structures in the early state, ﬁeld of
view to cover statistical relevant sample region, reasonable short time
of data acquisition to minimize image distortion due to thermal drift.
We took the following experimental parameters: 180 × 180 grid area
with 4 nm STEM probe step size, defocus of 2.5 µm and probe cur-
rent below the measurable quantity of 1 pA in the ﬁrst few frames,
and STEM probe step size increased to ∼6 nm when large structured
emerged and ﬁeld of view was limited.
Data handling, pre-processing and visualization.
The acquired data were pre-processed in Gatan DigitalMicrograph
software with public plugins and homemade scripts. The acquired data
is ﬁrstly aligned to account for the shift of center beam. Elliptical
distortion of the sum diffraction pattern was observed in some of the
SCED experiments, which can be hardware corrected using the ob-
jective lens stigmator (cf. Fig. S6). The distortion was observed to
not depend on the scanning position when the scanning ﬁeld is within
few micrometers. This makes the post-acquisition software correction
of individual pattern feasible based on the distortion evaluated from
the summed patterns. For this, we applied the evaluation and correc-
tion method developed by Mitchell and Van den Berg [23]. Due to
the high SNR in the SCED datasets, the diffraction signals at small
angles were obvious and straightforward for subsequent analysis us-
ing simple virtual apertures; and no hardware elastic ﬁltering (like in
Fig.2b) or post-processing background subtraction [24] were neces-
sary. The 2D orientation map of edge-on crystal domains was ob-
tained by directly evaluating the virtual dark ﬁeld image intensities
using sector apertures of radius between 2.6 and 2.8 nm−1 and angular
increment of n degrees. In this way a total of 360/n dark-ﬁeld images
were calculated, and each image corresponds to in-plane diffraction
angle φ = ni deﬁned by the sequence i of the virtual apertures. This
reduces the 4D dataset to a 3D dark ﬁeld image data cube. At any
(real space) scanning pixels, we search for the maximum intensity M
along the dark ﬁeld sequence and mark its location φ, which together
deﬁnes 2D grid of complex numbers M(x,y)eiφ(x,y) (equivalent to 2D
vectors). For face-on crystallites or overlapping crystallites, multiple
diffraction spot may appear at same diffraction angle q, and the above
algorithm fails to capture same orientation crystal domains with slight
out-of-plane tilt (which result in change of the center of Lauer circle
and ﬂicking of diffraction spots intensities). For this, we apply a ro-
tation invariant template matching method to ﬁnd location of face-on
domains and determine its rotation angle. Here, the rotation invariant
template matching is converted to a shift invariant template matching
via cross-correlation of the polar transformed diffraction patterns. Fi-
nally, the processed data in form of 2D vectors were visualized using
Python with Matplotlib, OpenCV and numpy.
Author contributions
MW and ES conceived the idea and designed the experiments. CH
prepared the samples and performed extensive TEM characterization
of the samples. MW and CH performed the in situ experiments. MW
developed 4D-SCED technically, and implemented algorithms to ana-
lyze the data, drafted the manuscript with input from all authors. CO
examined the 4D datasets to verify the results using alternative analy-
sis and visualization routines. All authors have given approval to the
ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We
acknowledge
ﬁnancial
support
from
Deutsche
For-
schungsgemeinschaft
(DFG)
via
the
research
training
school
GRK 1896: “In-Situ Microscopy with Electrons, X-rays and Scanning
Probes” and the Cluster of Excellence EXC 315 “Engineering of
Advanced Materials”. SFB 953 “Syntetic Carbon Allotropes”. Work
at the Molecular Foundry was supported by the Ofﬁce of Science,
Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
7Abbreviations
DRCN5T:
2,2’-[(3,3”’,3””,4’-tetraoctyl[2,2’:5’,2”:5”,2”’:5”’,2””-
quinquethiophene]-5,5””-diyl)bis[(Z)-methylidyne(3-ethyl-4-oxo-
5,2-thiazolidinediylidene)]]bis-propanedinitrile
PC71BM: Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
Supporting Information
Supporting ﬁgures S1-S6.
References
[1] T. Kassar, N. S. G¨uldal, M. Berlinghof, T. Ameri, A. Kratzer, B. C.
Schroeder, G. L. Destri, A. Hirsch, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, C. J.
Brabec, and T. Unruh, “Real-Time Investigation of Intercalation and
Structure Evolution in Printed Polymer:Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction
Thin Films,” Advanced Energy Materials, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1–8, 2016.
[2] J. Min, N. S. G¨uldal, J. Guo, C. Fang, X. Jiao, H. Hu, T. Heum¨uller,
H. Ade, and C. J. Brabec, “Gaining further insight into the effects of
thermal annealing and solvent vapor annealing on time morphological
development and degradation in small molecule solar cells,” Journal of
Materials Chemistry A, vol. 5, no. 34, pp. 18101–18110, 2017.
[3] J. Min, X. Jiao, V. Sgobba, B. Kan, T. Heum¨uller, S. Rechberger,
E. Spiecker, D. M. Guldi, X. Wan, Y. Chen, H. Ade, and C. J. Brabec,
“High efﬁciency and stability small molecule solar cells developed by
bulk microstructure ﬁne-tuning,” Nano Energy, vol. 28, pp. 241–249,
2016.
[4] K. Sun, Z. Xiao, E. Hanssen, M. F. Klein, H. H. Dam, M. Pfaff, D. Gerth-
sen, W. W. Wong, and D. J. Jones, “The role of solvent vapor annealing
in highly efﬁcient air-processed small molecule solar cells,” Journal of
Materials Chemistry A, vol. 2, no. 24, pp. 9048–9054, 2014.
[5] W. Wang, S. Pr¨oller, M. A. Niedermeier, V. K¨orstgens, M. Philipp, B. Su,
D. Mosegu´ı Gonz´alez, S. Yu, S. V. Roth, and P. M¨uller-Buschbaum,
“Development of the morphology during functional stack build-up of
P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells with inverted geometry,”
ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 602–610, 2015.
[6] Q. Chen, C. Dwyer, G. Sheng, C. Zhu, X. Li, C. Zheng, and Y. Zhu,
“Imaging Beam-Sensitive Materials by Electron Microscopy,” Advanced
Materials, vol. 32, no. 16, p. 1907619, 2020.
[7] R. F. Egerton, “Radiation damage to organic and inorganic specimens in
the TEM,” Micron, vol. 119, pp. 72–87, 2019.
[8] C. Ophus, “Four-Dimensional Scanning Transmission Electron Mi-
croscopy (4D-STEM): From Scanning Nanodiffraction to Ptychography
and Beyond,” Microscopy and Microanalysis, no. 2019, pp. 563–582,
2019.
[9] Y. Deng, C. Gammer, J. Ciston, P. Ercius, C. Ophus, K. Bustillo, C. Song,
R. Zhang, D. Wu, Y. Du, Z. Chen, H. Dong, A. G. Khachaturyan, and
A. M. Minor, “Hierarchically-structured large superelastic deformation in
ferroelastic-ferroelectrics,” Acta Materialia, vol. 181, pp. 501–509, 2019.
[10] V. B. Ozdol, C. Gammer, X. G. Jin, P. Ercius, C. Ophus, J. Ciston, and
A. M. Minor, “Strain mapping at nanometer resolution using advanced
nano-beam electron diffraction,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 106, no. 25,
2015.
[11] T. C. Pekin, J. Ding, C. Gammer, B. Ozdol, C. Ophus, M. Asta, R. O.
Ritchie, and A. M. Minor, “Direct measurement of nanostructural change
during in situ deformation of a bulk metallic glass,” Nature Communica-
tions, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2019.
[12] O. Panova, C. Ophus, C. J. Takacs, K. C. Bustillo, L. Balhorn, A. Salleo,
N. Balsara, and A. M. Minor, “Diffraction imaging of nanocrystalline
structures in organic semiconductor molecular thin ﬁlms,” Nature Mate-
rials, vol. 18, no. August, 2019.
[13] K. C. Bustillo, S. E. Zeltmann, M. Chen, J. Donohue, J. Ciston, C. Ophus,
and A. M. Minor, “4D-STEM of Beam-Sensitive Materials,” Accounts of
Chemical Research, 2021.
[14] S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, S. McFadzean, D. MacLaren, K. O’Shea, and
M. Benitez, “Aberration corrected Lorentz scanning transmission electron
microscopy,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 152, pp. 57–62, 2015.
[15] M. Wu and E. Spiecker, “Correlative micro-diffraction and differential
phase contrast study of mean inner potential and subtle beam-specimen
interaction,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 176, pp. 233–245, may 2017.
[16] S. P. Frigo, Z. H. Levine, and N. J. Zaluzec, “Submicron imaging of
buried integrated circuit structures using scanning confocal electron mi-
croscopy,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 81, no. 11, pp. 2112–2114, 2002.
[17] P. Wang, G. Behan, A. I. Kirkland, P. D. Nellist, E. C. Cosgriff, A. J.
D’Alfonso, A. J. Morgan, L. J. Allen, A. Hashimoto, M. Takeguchi,
K. Mitsuishi, and M. Shimojo, “Bright-ﬁeld scanning confocal electron
microscopy using a double aberration-corrected transmission electron mi-
croscope,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 111, no. 7, pp. 877–886, 2011.
[18] P. A. Midgley, “A simple new method to obtain high angular resolution
ω-q patterns,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 91–96, 1999.
[19] J. P. Morniroli, F. Houdellier, C. Roucau, J. Puiggal´ı, S. Gest´ı, and
A. Redja¨ımia, “LACDIF, a new electron diffraction technique obtained
with the LACBED conﬁguration and a Cs corrector: Comparison with
electron precession,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 100–115,
2008.
[20] C. Zheng, Y. Zhu, S. Lazar, and J. Etheridge, “Three dimensional con-
focal imaging using coherent elastically scattered electrons,” European
Microscopy Congress 2016: Proceedings, pp. 19–20, 2016.
[21] C. Dwyer, S. Lazar, L. Y. Chang, and J. Etheridge, “Image formation
in the scanning transmission electron microscope using object-conjugate
detectors,” Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations of Crystallog-
raphy, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 196–207, 2012.
[22] M. Berlinghof, S. Langner, C. Harreiß, E. M. Schmidt, R. Siris,
F. Bertram, C. Shen, J. Will, T. Schindler, A. Prihoda, S. Rechberger, G. S.
Duesberg, R. B. Neder, E. Spiecker, C. J. Brabec, and T. Unruh, “Crystal-
structure of active layers of small molecule organic photovoltaics before
and after solvent vapor annealing,” Zeitschrift f¨ur Kristallographie - Crys-
talline Materials, vol. 235, pp. 15–28, feb 2020.
[23] D. R. Mitchell and J. A. Van den Berg, “Development of an ellipse ﬁtting
method with which to analyse selected area electron diffraction patterns,”
Ultramicroscopy, vol. 160, pp. 140–145, 2016.
[24] O. Panova, X. C. Chen, K. C. Bustillo, C. Ophus, M. P. Bhatt, N. Balsara,
and A. M. Minor, “Orientation mapping of semicrystalline polymers us-
ing scanning electron nanobeam diffraction,” Micron, vol. 88, pp. 30–36,
2016.
8