arXiv:1706.09750v4  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  25 Nov 2020
Oscillation phenomena and experimental determination of exact mathematical
Stability Zones for magneto-conductivity in metals having complicated Fermi surfaces.
A.Ya.
Maltsev.
L.D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics
142432 Chernogolovka, pr. Ak. Semenova 1A, maltsev@itp.ac.ru
We consider the problem of exact experimental determination of the boundaries of Stability
Zones for magneto-conductivity in normal metals in the space of directions of B .
As can be
shown, this problem turns out to be nontrivial since the exact boundaries of Stability Zones are in
fact unobservable in direct measurements of conductivity. However, this problem can be eﬀectively
solved with the aid of the study of oscillation phenomena (cyclotron resonance, quantum oscillations)
in normal metals, which reveal a singular behavior on the mathematical boundary of a Stability
Zone.
I.
INTRODUCTION.
In this paper we consider galvano-magnetic phenomena
in normal metals, having complicated Fermi surfaces, in
the limit of the strong magnetic ﬁelds B (ωBτ ≫1). In
the standard approach we assume that the electron states
are described by a single-particle partition function f(p)
deﬁned on the space of the quasimomenta p ∈T3 for a
given type of the crystal lattice of a metal. In the equi-
librium state we assume as usually that all the electron
states with energy ǫ(p) less than the Fermi energy are
occupied (f(p) = 1) and all the states with energy higher
than the Fermi energy are empty (f(p) = 0). Let us say
also that we will omit here the spin variables which will
not play an essential role in our consideration.
The space of the quasimomenta p for a given conduc-
tion band represents a three-dimensional torus T3 given
by the factorization of the space R3 over the reciprocal
lattice vectors
T3
=
R3 
{n1a1 + n2a2 + n3 a3}
,
n1 , n2 , n3
∈Z
The vectors (a1, a2, a3) represent a basis for the re-
ciprocal lattice and are connected with the basis vectors
(l1, l2, l3) of the direct lattice by standard relations
a1
= 2πℏ
l2 × l3
(l1, l2, l3) ,
a2
= 2πℏ
l3 × l1
(l1, l2, l3) ,
a3
= 2πℏ
l1 × l2
(l1, l2, l3)
In this approach the Fermi surface SF :
SF
:
ǫ(p) = ǫF
represents a compact smooth surface embedded into
three-dimensional torus T3 .
Equivalently, we can consider the whole space of the
quasimomenta (R3) and assume that any two values of
p which diﬀer by a reciprocal lattice vector represent the
FIG. 1: A complicated Fermi surface as a 3-periodic surface
in the p - space.
same physical state for a given conduction band. In this
approach the dispersion relation ǫ(p) should be consid-
ered as a three-periodic function in R3 with the periods
a1 , a2 , and a3 . The Fermi surface represents in this
case a three-periodic surface in R3 which can have in
general a rather complicated form (see e.g. Fig. 1).
In the quasiclassical approximation the evolution of
the electron states in metal in the presence of electric
and magnetic ﬁelds can be described by the adiabatic
system
˙p
=
e
c [vgr(p) × B] + e E
In the limit of the strong magnetic ﬁelds the behavior
of conductivity is actually deﬁned by the geometry of the
dynamical system
˙p
=
e
c [vgr(p) × B]
=
e
c [∇ǫ(p) × B]
(I.1)
which will play the basic role in our considerations here.
System (I.1) is integrable from analytical point of view
and its trajectories are given by the intersections of the
constant energy levels ǫ(p) = const with the planes, or-
thogonal to B. At the same time, the global geometry
of the trajectories of (I.1) can still be rather nontrivial
in the p - space, which can be seen if we consider an in-2
B
FIG. 2: An intersection of a complicated Fermi surface by a
plane of general direction in the p - space.
b)
a)
B
B
FIG. 3: Closed (a) and open periodic (b) electron trajectories
on the Fermi surfaces of diﬀerent forms.
tersection of a complicated Fermi surface by an arbitrary
plane (Fig. 2).
An important role of the geometry of open trajecto-
ries of system (I.1) for the behavior of conductivity in
strong magnetic ﬁelds was ﬁrst revealed by the school of
I.M. Lifshitz (I.M. Lifshitz, M.Ya. Azbel, M.I. Kaganov,
V.G. Peschasky) in 1950’s (see [1–8]). Thus, in the paper
[1] the crucial diﬀerence between the contribution of the
closed and open periodic trajectories (Fig. 3) of (I.1) to
the conductivity tensor in the limit ωBτ →∞was ﬁrst
described.
In papers [2, 3] more general types of open trajectories,
which are not periodic in p - space and are locally sta-
ble with respect to small rotations of B were considered.
Both the open periodic trajectories of (I.1) and more gen-
eral trajectories, considered in [2, 3], have a mean direc-
tion in the p - space which results in strong anisotropy
of their contribution to the conductivity in the plane or-
thogonal to B . Thus, if we chose the z - axis along the
direction of B and the x - axis along the mean direction
of the open trajectories in p - space we can write for the
limiting values of the conductivity tensor σkl(B) :
σkl
∞
=
ne2τ
m∗


0 0 0
0 ∗∗
0 ∗∗


(I.2)
In formula (I.2) the value n denotes the mean concen-
tration of the conductivity electrons in metal and m∗
has a meaning of the eﬀective electron mass in the crys-
tal. The value τ has a meaning of the mean free elec-
tron motion time, and ∗denote just some dimensionless
constants of order of unity. Let us note that the projec-
tion of a quasiclassical electron trajectory in x - space
on the plane orthogonal to B coincides with the corre-
sponding trajectory in p - space, rotated by 90◦, which
explains the form of the tensor (I.2). It’s not diﬃcult
to see that the measurement of the conductivity in the
plane orthogonal to B gives a possibility to ﬁnd the mean
direction of the open trajectories in p - space, which co-
incides with the direction of the lowest conductivity in
the limit ωBτ →∞.
For comparison, the contribution of the closed trajec-
tories of system (I.1) to the conductivity tensor is al-
most isotropic in the plane orthogonal to B in the limit
ωBτ →∞and we can write for its limiting values
σkl
∞
=
ne2τ
m∗


0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 ∗


,
where ˆz = B/B.
The general problem of classiﬁcation of diﬀerent trajec-
tories of system (I.1) with arbitrary periodic dispersion
relation ǫ(p) was set by S.P. Novikov ([9]) and was in-
tensively studied in his topological school (S.P. Novikov,
A.V. Zorich, S.P. Tsarev, I.A. Dynnikov).
Let us say
here, that this problem turned out to be highly non-
trivial in its general form and required a set of rather deep
topological results for its complete investigation (see [10–
14]). The most important achievements in the study of
this problem were made in the papers [10, 13] where deep
topological theorems about the behavior of trajectories
of system (I.1) were proved. In particular, the results
obtained in [10] and [13] give a basis for description of
the stable (regular) non-closed trajectories of system (I.1)
with arbitrary ǫ(p) which will be also considered in the
present paper. Let us formulate here the properties of
the stable (with respect to small rotations of B or small
variations of the Fermi energy ǫF) open trajectories of
system (I.1), which play, from our point of view, the most
important role in the magneto-transport phenomena in
normal metals:
1) Every stable open trajectory of system (I.1) lies in
a straight strip of a ﬁnite width in the plane orthogonal
to B and passes through it from −∞to +∞(Fig. 4);
2) All the stable open trajectories at a given direction
of B have the same mean direction in p - space, which is
given by the intersection of the plane, orthogonal to B ,
and some locally stable integral plane in the p - space.
The properties formulated above were used in [15] for
the introduction of important topological characteristics
of electron spectra in metals observable in the transport
phenomena in strong magnetic ﬁelds. These characteris-
tics were called in [15] the topological quantum numbers3
FIG. 4: The form of a stable open trajectory of system (I.1)
in the plane orthogonal to B .
observable in the conductivity of normal metals and can
be described in the following way:
First, according to property (1) we should observe a
strong anisotropy of conductivity in the plane orthogo-
nal to B in the limit ωBτ →∞in the case of presence
of stable open trajectories on the Fermi surface. The lim-
iting values of the conductivity tensor σkl(B) are given
by the formula (I.2) and we can deﬁne the mean direc-
tion of the open trajectories of (I.1) as the direction of
the lowest conductivity in the plane orthogonal to B for
ωBτ ≫1. Due to the stability properties of the open
trajectories we can deﬁne also these directions for close
directions of B and deﬁne an integral plane Γ , which
is swept by the directions of the lowest conductivity in a
given “Stability Zone” in the space of directions of B .
Let us mention here that integral character of the plane
Γ in the p - space means that it is generated by some
two reciprocal lattice vectors q1, q2:
Γ = {λ q1 + µ q2 ,
λ, µ ∈R} ,
q1 = n1a1 + n2a2 + n3a3 ,
q2 = m1a1 + m2a2 + m3a3 ,
(n1, n2, n3, m1, m2, m3 ∈Z)
In the x - space the plane Γ can be given by an indi-
visible triple of integers (M1, M2, M3) from the equation
M1 (x, l1) + M2 (x, l2) + M3 (x, l3) = 0
where (l1, l2, l3) represent the basis of the direct lat-
tice. The numbers (M1, M2, M3) were called in [15] the
topological quantum numbers observable in conductiv-
ity of normal metals and represent the homology classes
of two-dimensional “carriers of open trajectories” in the
torus T3 . Let us say that the triples (M1, M2, M3) can
be rather nontrivial for complicated Fermi surfaces and
represent (together with the geometry of the “Stability
Zones”) an important characteristic of the electron spec-
trum in a metal.
Another important property of the stable open trajec-
tories of system (I.1) is that they never appear together
with more complicated (unstable) chaotic open trajecto-
ries (chaotic trajectories of Tsarev or Dynnikov type) at
the same direction of B ([16]). As a result, the contri-
bution of the trajectories shown at Fig. 4 to the conduc-
tivity represents the only nontrivial part of the tensor
σkl(B) in the “Stability Zone” and is easily observable
in experiments. Let us say here also, that the considera-
tion of “chaotic” trajectories of system (I.1) will not be
a subject of the present paper.
The most detailed mathematical survey on the geom-
etry of trajectories of system (I.1) is represented in the
paper [16]. The detailed description of the physical phe-
nomena based on topological investigations of the system
(I.1) can be found in the papers [17–19]. Let us give also a
reference to the paper [20] where a convenient mathemat-
ical method of numerical investigation of the structure of
Stability Zones, suggested by I.A. Dynnikov, was used
by R. De Leo for investigation of Stability Zones for a
set of analytical dispersion relations, used as approxima-
tions to dispersion relations in real crystals. We can give
here also a reference to the papers [14, 21–30] devoted to
investigation of diﬀerent aspects of chaotic trajectories
of system (I.1), which can arise on rather complicated
Fermi surfaces.
The present paper will be devoted to the methods of
experimental determination of the boundaries of exact
mathematical “Stability Zones”, which represents in fact
a nontrivial problem from experimental point of view.
Let us say at once that we deﬁne the exact mathemati-
cal Stability Zone Ωα as a region on the angle diagram
(unit sphere S2 ) corresponding to the presence of the
stable open trajectories with the same topological quan-
tum numbers (M α
1 , M α
2 , M α
3 ) on the Fermi surface. Ac-
cording to this deﬁnition, the open trajectories of system
(I.1) exist for any B/B ∈Ωα , are stable with respect to
small rotations of B and deﬁne the same integral plane
Γα in the p - space. The Stability Zone Ωα , deﬁned in
this way, represents a ﬁnite region on the unit sphere S2
with a piecewise smooth boundary (Fig. 5).
Let us say, however, that the full set of directions of
B , corresponding to the presence of the open trajectories
on the Fermi surface, has in general more complicated
structure. Thus, it was ﬁrst pointed out in [31] that the
boundaries of the regions on the angle diagram, corre-
sponding to appearance of the open trajectories, should
have in fact a singular structure, which is caused by the
diﬀerence between periodic and non-periodic trajectories
arising on the Fermi surface. Using general topological
description of the stable open trajectories of system (I.1)
it can be shown that a general Stability Zone Ωα on
S2 has necessarily an everywhere dense “net” of direc-
tions B ∈Ωα , where the stable open trajectories of
system (I.1) are actually periodic ([32]). Moreover, this
net should be in fact extended outside the Zone Ωα , since
the periodic open trajectories still exist on its segments
near the boundary of Ωα . Let us note here, that accord-
ing to our deﬁnition we don’t include the corresponding
segments into the Zone Ωα since the corresponding tra-
jectories are not stable anymore with respect to small
rotations of B . Besides that, the closed electron trajec-4
Ωα
FIG. 5: An exact mathematical Stability Zone Ωα on the unit
sphere S2 , corresponding to a ﬁxed triple (M α
1 , M α
2 , M α
3 ) .
Ωα
Ωα
^
Ωβ
Ωβ
^
FIG. 6: The “experimentally observable Stability Zones” with
nets of special directions of B on the angle diagram.
tories near the boundary of Ωα have in fact very speciﬁc
form which makes them hardly distinguishable from the
open trajectories from experimental point of view. As
a result, the “experimentally observable Stability Zone”
ˆΩα is actually diﬀerent from the exact mathematical Sta-
bility Zone (Fig. 6).
B
I
II
I
FIG. 7: A model Fermi surface of genus 3 in p - space with
stable open trajectories of system (I.1).
Let us say also that due to the diﬀerence between the
periodic and non-periodic trajectories the analytic de-
pendence of the values σkl(B) both on the value and
the direction of B is actually rather complicated both
in the Zone Ωα and ˆΩα (see [32]). As a result, the ex-
act boundary of a mathematical Stability Zone Ωα is in
fact unobservable in direct measurements of the values
σkl(B) even for rather big values of B .
On the other hand, the exact form of the mathematical
Stability Zones Ωα represents an important characteris-
tic of the dispersion relation ǫ(p) and can play rather
important role in the reconstruction of the form of the
Fermi surface from experimental data.
In the present
paper we will show that the oscillation phenomena in
normal metals give in fact a convenient way to deter-
mine the boundary of the Zones Ωα , which is based on
the general topological structure of the “carriers of open
trajectories” on the Fermi surface. In the next chapter
we will give a description of the topological structure of
a (complicated) Fermi surface in the presence of the sta-
ble open trajectories of system (I.1) and discuss special
features of the oscillation phenomena on the surfaces of
this kind.
II.
SPECIAL TOPOLOGICAL
REPRESENTATION OF A FERMI SURFACE
CONTAINING STABLE OPEN TRAJECTORIES
AND THE OSCILLATION PHENOMENA IN
NORMAL METALS.
To describe the special topological representation of a
complicated Fermi surface in presence of the stable open
trajectories of system (I.1) let us introduce ﬁrst a model
Fermi surface, having the following form:
Consider a periodic set of parallel integral planes in p
- space, connected by cylinders of ﬁnite heights (Fig. 7).
Let us divide all the planes into two diﬀerent classes
(I and II) - the odd-numbered planes and the even-5
numbered planes.
Let us assume now that the planes
of each class can be obtained from each other by a shift
on some reciprocal lattice vector and represent the same
object after the factorization over the reciprocal lattice.
In the same way, we assume that the cylinders are also
divided into two classes which represent just two non-
equivalent objects after the factorization.
We can say then that the periodic surface described
above gives an example of a Fermi surface, which is rep-
resented as a pair of two parallel two-dimensional tori
T2 ⊂T3 embedded in T3 and two cylinders of ﬁnite
heights, connecting the tori T2 .
Let us assume now that the axes of the cylinders are
almost parallel in p - space and consider a magnetic ﬁeld
having a direction close to the direction of the axes of
the cylinders. It is not diﬃcult to see that if the direc-
tion of B is almost parallel to the cylinders then the
cylinders consist mostly of closed trajectories of system
(I.1), which cut our Fermi surface into separate parallel
(deformed) planes. It can be also noted that the closed
trajectories arising on the cylinders of diﬀerent types also
belong to diﬀerent (the electron-type or the hole-type)
types. The open trajectories of system (I.1) are given by
the intersections of the planes, orthogonal to B , with
the periodically deformed integral planes in p - space
and have the regular form shown at Fig. 4. The parts of
the Fermi surface, consisting of closed trajectories, rep-
resent cylinders, restricted by singular trajectories, with
heights, depending on the direction of B . Thus, we have
a Stability Zone around our initial direction of B with
topological quantum numbers, deﬁned by the homology
class of the integral planes introduced above.
The boundary of the Stability Zone is deﬁned by the
condition that the height of the cylinders of one type be-
comes zero, such that the corresponding closed trajecto-
ries disappear on the Fermi surface (Fig. 8). As a result,
the remaining closed trajectories can not cut the Fermi
surface anymore into separate planes and we do not have
stable open trajectories after the crossing the boundary
of a Stability Zone. Thus, a Stability Zone represents
in general a region with a piecewise smooth boundary in
the space of directions of B .
Let us note, that we don’t claim here that the open tra-
jectories of system (I.1) completely disappear outside the
Stability Zone Ω. Indeed, we can see that the remaining
cylinders of closed trajectories now cut the Fermi surface
into connected pairs of integral planes and the trajec-
tories of system (I.1) still admit an eﬀective description
near the boundary of the Zone Ω. It is not diﬃcult to
see, that the trajectories can now “jump” between two
planes which gives a reconstruction of the open trajecto-
ries after the crossing of the boundary of the Zone Ω. It
can be seen also that all the open trajectories will trans-
form into long closed trajectories if the intersection of the
plane, orthogonal to B , with the integral planes has an
irrational direction in the p - space. At the same time, if
the intersection of the plane, orthogonal to B , and the
integral planes has a rational direction, then we will have
B
FIG. 8: A very short cylinder of closed trajectories of one
type for a direction of B , close to the boundary of a Stability
Zone.
both the long closed trajectories and the open periodic
trajectories near the boundary of the Zone Ω. The open
periodic trajectories, however, are not stable outside the
Zone Ω, so we should not include the corresponding set
of directions of B in the mathematical Stability Zone. At
the same time, this set belongs to the “experimentally ob-
servable Stability Zone”, which includes the mathemati-
cal Stability Zone as a subset. The analytical properties
of the conductivity in the experimentally observable Sta-
bility Zone are in fact rather complicated (see [32]), which
makes the experimental determination of the boundary
of a mathematical Stability Zone a non-trivial problem.
The picture described above represents a Fermi sur-
face of genus 3, embedded in the three-dimensional torus
T3 , and gives an example of complicated enough Fermi
surface from topological point of view. In general, the
topological representation of real complicated Fermi sur-
face, carrying stable open trajectories of system (I.1), can
diﬀer from that described above in the following details:
1) The number of non-equivalent cylinders of closed
trajectories can be bigger (or less) than 2;
2) There can be additional cylinders of closed trajec-
tories on the integral planes, having a point as a base;
3) The number of non-equivalent parallel integral
planes can be bigger than 2, being any even number (Fig.
9).
Let us say here that in the most general case we can
also assume that parts of the Fermi surface consisting of
closed trajectories and connecting carriers of open trajec-
tories can have a composite structure and consist of sev-
eral cylinders of closed trajectories inside some Stabilty
Zone Ωα. This possibility does not change the essence of
our further considerations, and is extremely unlikely for
real Fermi surfaces, so we will not dwell on it here. Thus,
we can consider the described structure of the Fermi sur-
face as the most common near the boundary of Stability
Zones.
The general statement formulated above represents a
corollary of rather deep topological theorems, proved in
the papers [10, 13, 16]. Let us say that the situation (3)6
B
.
.
.
FIG. 9: Topological representation of a Fermi surface of a
very high genus carrying stable open trajectories of system
(I.1).
FIG. 10: A complicated Stability Zone, representing an over-
lapping of two Zones with the same topological numbers.
can be observed actually only for surfaces of very high
genus, so, for many real metals it actually does not arise.
Let us note also, that the situation (3) can be consid-
ered also as an “overlapping” of two (or more) Stability
Zones with the same topological quantum numbers. As
was pointed out in [32], the analytical properties of con-
ductivity are the most complicated in this situation, in
particular, we should observe here more than one bound-
ary of a Stability Zone (Fig. 10).
In any situation the boundary of an exact mathemat-
ical Stability Zone is deﬁned by vanishing of one of the
cylinders of closed trajectories, so, as we will see below,
the study of the oscillation phenomena gives in fact a con-
venient instrument to detect the boundary of a Stability
Zone in experiment.
Let us say also here, that the picture described above
represents a purely topological representation of a Fermi
surface, carrying stable open trajectories (or, better to
say, a topological representation of system (I.1) on the
Fermi surface), and can be visually much more compli-
cated due to possible complicated geometry of the ob-
jects, introduced above.
Below we will consider the oscillation phenomena in
the picture described above and describe their special
features near the boundary of a Stability Zone. Certainly,
we will not give here a detailed theoretical exposition of
the phenomena we are going to consider and give just a
reference on their standard description (see e.g. [7, 33–
35]).
Let us start with the (classical) cyclotron resonance
phenomenon, which can be described with the aid of the
purely kinetic approach for the electron gas in normal
metals. As it is well known, the cyclotron resonance phe-
nomenon is connected with the oscillating dependence of
the surface conductivity on the frequency of the alternat-
ing ﬁeld in presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld B . In the
most common setting, the direction of B is assumed to
be parallel to the metal surface and the alternating elec-
tric ﬁeld can have diﬀerent directions in the same plane.
The oscillating behavior of the surface conductivity (in
the situation of anomalous skin eﬀect) is caused by the
coincidence of the frequency Ωof the incident wave with
the values n ωB , n ∈N , where ωB = ωB(pz) is the
cyclotron frequency, deﬁned for every closed trajectory
of system (I.1). In general, ωB(pz) represents a com-
plicated function of pz and the oscillating behavior of
conductivity is determined in fact by the extremal values
of ωB(pz) , satisfying the condition dωB/dpz = 0.
In the geometric picture described above the closed
trajectories are combined into cylinders connecting inte-
gral planes and we have the relation ωB(pz) = 0 on the
bases of the cylinders. As a result, the positive function
ωB(pz) should have at least one maximum at every cylin-
der, i.e. every cylinder of closed trajectories contains at
least one extremal trajectory in the sense pointed above.
Let us say, that theoretically we can have several max-
ima and minima of the function ωB(pz) on a cylinder
of closed trajectories, however, the situation of several
critical points of ωB(pz) on the same cylinder requires
in fact rather complicated geometry of the dispersion re-
lation. For simplicity, we will assume here that all the
cylinders of closed trajectories contain just one extremal
(maximal) value of ωB(pz) . As we will see, more compli-
cated cases do not contain any fundamental diﬀerences
from the simple case under consideration.
Let us make also another remark. For Fermi surfaces
of not very high genus the boundary of a Stability Zone
is deﬁned by disappearance of just one cylinder of closed
trajectories of system (I.1), which is invariant under the
transformation p →−p . In this case the extremal value
of ωB corresponds to the central cross-section of the
cylinder by the plane orthogonal to B (Fig. 11). For7
B
FIG. 11: The extremal trajectory on a cylinder of closed tra-
jectories of system (I.1).
more complicated Fermi surfaces (of a high genus) we can
also have the situation when two non-equivalent cylin-
ders, which transform into each other under the trans-
formation p →−p , disappear simultaneously on the
boundary of a Stability Zone. Let us say, however, that
this situation requires in fact a really complicated Fermi
surface, so, in most of experiments we can actually as-
sume the ﬁrst case. Let us note also here, that the ﬁrst
situation has also the additional property
⟨vz
gr⟩tr
= 0
on the extremal trajectories, which permits in fact not
to impose too strict condition that B is parallel to the
metal surface.
Coming back to the cyclotron resonance phenomenon,
we can see then that for the structure of the Fermi surface
described above the oscillating conductivity behavior in
high frequency electric ﬁelds should reveal a ﬁnite num-
ber of the main terms, representing the contribution of
the extremal trajectories on the cylinders of closed tra-
jectories and also of the endpoints of the special (degen-
erate) cylinders at Fig. 9. Let us also note here that
the last contribution actually does not arise if the direc-
tion of E in the incident wave is orthogonal to our ﬁxed
direction of B . Every main term is characterized by a
periodic dependence on the frequency Ω(or on 1/B )
with its own period Ti . For directions of B lying in-
side a Stability Zone Ωα the periods Ti(B/B) represent
smooth functions of the direction of B and one of the
periods Ti0 becomes inﬁnite at the boundary of the Sta-
bility Zone (Fig. 12). After crossing the boundary of a
mathematical Stability Zone Ωα the corresponding con-
tribution disappears completely, while all the other main
contributions do not notably change (Fig. 13).
Let us specially note here that both the vanishing of
one of the main oscillating terms in the conductivity and
increasing of its period Ti0 have very sharp character
near the boundary of a Stability Zone. Indeed, the main
oscillating terms in conductivity are given by the con-
tributions of very narrow “bands” of closed trajectories
near the extremal trajectories, which do not change no-
ticeably up to the boundary of the Zone Ωα .
In the
σ
1/B
σ
1/B
FIG. 12: The increasing of the period of one of the main
oscillating terms in the surface conductivity (real or imaginary
part) near the boundary in a Stability Zone.
σ
1/B
σ
1/B
FIG. 13: The disappearance of one of the main oscillating
contributions in the surface conductivity after crossing the
boundary of a Stability Zone.
same way, a noticeable increasing of the period Ti0 is
caused by a close approach of the singular trajectories
to the extremal trajectory on a cylinder of closed trajec-
tories (Fig.
8).
It can be also shown, that this eﬀect
starts to manifest itself in a pretty narrow region near
the boundary of Ωα . As a result, the intermediate pic-
ture represented at Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 can in fact be
practically unobservable in the experimental study of the
cyclotron resonance phenomenon, such that we will most
probably observe actually a more sharp transition (Fig.
14) after crossing the boundary of a Stability Zone.
We can see then that, despite the fact that the long
closed trajectories arising outside a Stability Zone are
hardly distinguishable from the open trajectories from
experimental point of view, the cyclotron resonance phe-
nomenon provides us a good tool for exact experimental
determination of the boundary of a mathematical Stabil-
ity Zone. Let us note also that the long closed trajec-
tories arising near the boundary of a mathematical Sta-
bility Zone correspond to very large periods of electron
motion along the orbit which can exceed the free elec-
tron motion time, so, they do not give in this case any
visible contribution in the cyclotron resonance picture in
experiment.
Let us discuss now brieﬂy quantum oscillations phe-
nomena in normal metals among which the oscillations
of the magnetic susceptibility (De Haas - Van Alphen ef-8
σ
1/B
σ
1/B
FIG. 14: The schematic sharp change of the experimental pic-
ture of oscillations of the surface conductivity after crossing
the boundary of a Stability Zone.
It can be seen that the
change in the oscillatory behavior is represented by the dis-
appearance of one of the main oscillation terms from a ﬁnite
sum of such terms.
fect) and of the conductivity (Shubnikov - De Haas eﬀect)
with the value of 1/B are the most often mentioned.
The common reason for the quantum oscillation phe-
nomena in normal metals is the quantization of the elec-
tron motion along the closed trajectories of system (I.1)
in the plane orthogonal to B . In the quasiclassical ap-
proximation we should put now that the closed trajecto-
ries of system (I.1) should be selected in accordance with
the quantization rule
S(ǫ, pz) =
2πeℏB
c

n + 1
2

,
n ≫1 ,
where S(ǫ, pz) is the area bounded by a closed trajectory
of system (I.1) in the plane orthogonal to B in the p -
space.
The quantum oscillations of physical quantities mea-
sured in metals are connected then with the crossing of
the Fermi level by the corresponding quantized energy
levels which deﬁnes us the period of the corresponding
oscillations, brought by a ﬁxed closed trajectory on the
Fermi surface
∆1
B
=
2πeℏ
c S(ǫF , pz)
Like in the case of the cyclotron resonance the main
terms in the oscillating behavior are brought by the ex-
tremal closed trajectories, which are deﬁned now by the
condition dS/dpz = 0 . As in the previous situation, we
can expect here the presence of a ﬁnite number of trajec-
tories of this kind on every cylinder, connecting integral
planes, if B/B ∈Ωα . Thus, the oscillating behavior
of the physical quantities should be mainly represented
here by several main oscillating terms, having diﬀerent
periods

∆1
B

i
=
2πeℏ
c Si
extr
in the variable 1/B .
For not extremely complicated Fermi surfaces we can
expect again that every cylinder of closed trajectories of
system (I.1) contains just one trajectory corresponding
to an extremal area in the p - space. Besides that, for
the Fermi surfaces of not very high genus we can ex-
pect that every cylinder of closed trajectories is invariant
under the transformation p →−p , so, every extremal
trajectory on this cylinder represents in fact its central
cross-section by the plane orthogonal to B . Let us say,
however, that for very complicated Fermi surfaces the
assumptions above are not necessarily fulﬁlled. In par-
ticular, in the situation when we have pairs of cylinders,
transforming into each other under the transformation
p →−p , the extremal trajectories on them can be lo-
cated near the bases of the cylinders. In general, the de-
tails pointed above do not change noticeably the scheme
of using quantum oscillations phenomena for the deter-
mination of the exact boundary of Stability Zones for
magneto-conductivity in normal metals.
Like in the case of the cyclotron resonance, we should
observe here a “quick change” in the picture of oscilla-
tions of physical quantities after crossing the boundary
of a Stability Zone, which is caused by the disappearance
of one (or more) of the cylinders of closed trajectories of
system (I.1). Also in this case the changes are sharply
expressed at the boundary of Ωα since the corresponding
main term in the oscillation picture is brought by an ex-
tremal trajectory, which remains almost the same up to
the boundary of Ωα and disappears abruptly after cross-
ing the boundary. The changes in the oscillation picture
have the form, similar to that observed in the cyclotron
resonance, showing the disappearance of one of the main
oscillation terms (Fig. 14). Let us just note, that in this
case we should not see at all an increasing of the corre-
sponding period of oscillations near the boundary of Ωα ,
since it is deﬁned now by the area restricted by an ex-
tremal trajectory (and not cyclotron frequency), which
does not change much near the boundary of a Stability
Zone.
At last, let us make one more additional remark. As
we saw above, the description of the quantum oscillations
in normal metals is connected with the area bounded by
an extremal trajectory in the plane orthogonal to B .
The extremal trajectories in the theory of the cyclotron
resonance are deﬁned by the extremal values of the cy-
clotron frequency, which is actually connected with the
value ∂S(ǫ, pz)/∂ǫ according to the formulae
ωB
=
eB
m∗c
,
m∗
=
1
2π
∂S(ǫ, pz)
∂ǫ
At the same time, the value ∂S(ǫ, pz)/∂ǫ can be mea-
sured also in the experimental study of the quantum os-
cillations, using the investigation of their temperature de-
pendence ([7, 33–35]). We would like to point out here,
that the values of ∂S(ǫ, pz)/∂ǫ , measured by these two
diﬀerent ways should coincide in fact for B/B ∈Ωα for
most of the real metals having not extremely complicated
Fermi surfaces. The reason of this coincidence is given9
here by the fact, that both the cyclotron resonance phe-
nomenon and the quantum oscillations phenomena are
connected with the same extremal trajectories, given by
the central cross-sections of the cylinders of closed tra-
jectories in the topological representation of the Fermi
surface according to Fig. 9. At the same time, for metals
with extremely complicated Fermi surfaces, this circum-
stance may not take place in general, so, the values of
∂S(ǫ, pz)/∂ǫ , measured in these two diﬀerent ways, can
be diﬀerent, since they are connected now with diﬀerent
extremal trajectories of system (I.1). It’s not diﬃcult to
see, that our last remark has no direct relationship to the
determination of the boundaries of the Stability Zones in
metals, however, it can play a role in more detailed inves-
tigation of the oscillation phenomena for B/B ∈Ωα .
III.
CONCLUSIONS.
We consider the problem of the exact determina-
tion of the boundary of a Stability Zone for magneto-
conductivity of normal metals in the space of directions
of B . As can be shown, this problem is actually rather
nontrivial from experimental point of view due to a sub-
stantial diﬀerence between the exact mathematical Sta-
bility Zones and the “experimentally observable Stability
Zones” in the direct conductivity measurements. It can
be shown, however, that the experimental detection of
the exact boundary of a Stability Zone can be eﬀectively
implemented with the aid of the well-known oscillation
phenomena such as the cyclotron resonance or quantum
oscillations in normal metals.
Thus, the experimental
study of oscillation phenomena in suﬃciently strong mag-
netic ﬁelds reveals a sharp change in the picture of the
oscillatory behavior of physical quantities after crossing
the boundary of the mathematical Stability Zone as func-
tions of the value of B for a given direction of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. This abrupt change in the oscillatory behavior
can be described in the general case as the disappearance
of one of the principal terms from the total contribution,
represented by a ﬁnal sum of such terms (Fig. 14). So,
a detailed study of the oscillatory behavior of physical
quantities at diﬀerent directions of B allows us actually
to determine the precise boundaries of the mathematical
Stability Zones for the magneto-conductivity of metals.
The results of the paper are based on the topological de-
scription of the structure of the Fermi surface in the case
of presence of stable open quasiclassical electron trajec-
tories on it.
[1] I.M.Lifshitz, M.Ya.Azbel, M.I.Kaganov. The Theory of
Galvanomagnetic Eﬀects in Metals., Sov. Phys. JETP
4:1 (1957), 41.
[2] I.M. Lifshitz, V.G. Peschansky., Galvanomagnetic char-
acteristics of metals with open Fermi surfaces., Sov. Phys.
JETP 8:5 (1959), 875.
[3] I.M. Lifshitz, V.G. Peschansky., Galvanomagnetic char-
acteristics of metals with open Fermi surfaces. II., Sov.
Phys. JETP 11:1 (1960), 137.
[4] I.M. Lifshitz, M.I. Kaganov., Some problems of the elec-
tron theory of metals I. Classical and quantum mechanics
of electrons in metals., Sov. Phys. Usp. 2:6 (1960), 831-
835.
[5] I.M. Lifshitz, M.I. Kaganov., Some problems of the elec-
tron theory of metals II. Statistical mechanics and ther-
modynamics of electrons in metals., Sov. Phys. Usp. 5:6
(1963), 878-907.
[6] I.M. Lifshitz, M.I. Kaganov., Some problems of the elec-
tron theory of metals III. Kinetic properties of electrons
in metals., Sov. Phys. Usp. 8:6 (1966), 805-851.
[7] I.M. Lifshitz, M.Ya. Azbel, M.I. Kaganov., Electron The-
ory of Metals. Moscow, Nauka, 1971. Translated: New
York: Consultants Bureau, 1973.
[8] M.I. Kaganov, V.G. Peschansky., Galvano-magnetic phe-
nomena today and forty years ago., Physics Reports 372
(2002), 445-487.
[9] S.P. Novikov., The Hamiltonian formalism and a many-
valued analogue of Morse theory., Russian Math. Surveys
37 (5) (1982), 1-56.
[10] A.V. Zorich., A problem of Novikov on the semiclassi-
cal motion of an electron in a uniform almost rational
magnetic ﬁeld., Russian Math. Surveys 39 (5) (1984),
287-288.
[11] I.A. Dynnikov., Proof of S.P. Novikov’s conjecture for the
case of small perturbations of rational magnetic ﬁelds.,
Russian Math. Surveys 47 (3) (1992), 172-173.
[12] S.P. Tsarev. Private communication. (1992-93).
[13] I.A. Dynnikov., Proof S.P. Novikov’s conjecture on the
semiclassical motion of an electron., Math. Notes 53:5
(1993), 495-501.
[14] I.A. Dynnikov., Semiclassical motion of the electron. A
proof of the Novikov conjecture in general position and
counterexamples., Solitons, geometry, and topology: on
the crossroad, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. Ser. 2, 179,
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997, 45-73.
[15] S.P. Novikov, A.Y. Maltsev., Topological quantum char-
acteristics observed in the investigation of the conduc-
tivity in normal metals., JETP Letters 63 (10) (1996),
855-860.
[16] I.A. Dynnikov., The geometry of stability regions in
Novikov’s problem on the semiclassical motion of an elec-
tron., Russian Math. Surveys 54:1 (1999), 21-59.
[17] S.P. Novikov, A.Y. Maltsev., Topological phenomena in
normal metals., Physics-Uspekhi 41:3 (1998), 231-239.
[18] A.Ya. Maltsev, S.P. Novikov., Quasiperiodic functions
and Dynamical Systems in Quantum Solid State Physics.,
Bulletin of Braz. Math. Society, New Series 34:1 (2003),
171-210.
[19] A.Ya. Maltsev,
S.P. Novikov.,
Dynamical Systems,
Topology and Conductivity in Normal Metals in strong
magnetic ﬁelds., Journal of Statistical Physics 115:(1-2)
(2004), 31-46.
[20] R. De Leo., First-principles generation of stereographic
maps for high-ﬁeld magnetoresistance in normal metals:10
An application to Au and Ag., Physica B: Condensed
Matter 362 (1–4) (2005), 62–75.
[21] A.V. Zorich., Proc. “Geometric Study of Foliations”.,
(Tokyo, November 1993) / ed. T.Mizutani et al. Singa-
pore: World Scientiﬁc, 479-498 (1994).
[22] A.Y. Maltsev., Anomalous behavior of the electrical con-
ductivity tensor in strong magnetic ﬁelds., JETP 85 (5)
(1997), 934-942.
[23] R. De Leo., Existence and measure of ergodic leaves in
Novikov’s problem on the semiclassical motion of an elec-
tron., Russian Math. Surveys 55:1 (2000), 166-168.
[24] R. De Leo., Characterization of the set of “ergodic di-
rections” in Novikov’s problem of quasi-electron orbits
in normal metals., Russian Math. Surveys 58:5 (2003),
1042-1043.
[25] R. De Leo., Topology of plane sections of periodic poly-
hedra with an application to the Truncated Octahedron.,
Experimental Mathematics 15:1 (2006), 109-124.
[26] R. De Leo, I.A. Dynnikov., An example of a fractal set of
plane directions having chaotic intersections with a ﬁxed
3-periodic surface., Russian Math. Surveys 62:5 (2007),
990–992.
[27] R. De Leo, I.A. Dynnikov., Geometry of plane sections
of the inﬁnite regular skew polyhedron {4, 6 | 4}., Geom.
Dedicata 138:1 (2009), 51-67.
[28] A. Skripchenko., Symmetric interval identiﬁcation sys-
tems of order three., Discrete Contin. Dyn. Sys. 32:2
(2012), 643-656.
[29] A. Skripchenko., On connectedness of chaotic sections of
some 3-periodic surfaces., Ann. Glob. Anal. Geom. 43
(2013), 253-271.
[30] I. Dynnikov, A. Skripchenko., On typical leaves of a mea-
sured foliated 2-complex of thin type., Topology, Ge-
ometry, Integrable Systems, and Mathematical Physics:
Novikov’s Seminar 2012-2014, Advances in the Mathe-
matical Sciences., Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. Ser. 2, 234,
eds. V.M. Buchstaber, B.A. Dubrovin, I.M. Krichever,
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2014, 173-200, arXiv:
1309.4884
[31] R.N. Gurzhy, A.I Kopeliovich., Low-temperature electric
conductivity of pure metals., In the book: Conductivity
electrons., Red. M.I. Kaganov, V.S. Edelman., Moscow,
Nauka, 1985 (in Russian).
[32] A.Ya. Maltsev., On the Analytical Properties of the
Magneto-Conductivity in the Case of Presence of Stable
Open Electron Trajectories on a Complex Fermi Surface.,
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 124 (5)
(2017), 805-831.
[33] C. Kittel., Quantum Theory of Solids., Wiley, 1963.
[34] A.A. Abrikosov., Fundamentals of the Theory of Metals.,
Elsevier Science & Technology, Oxford, United Kingdom,
1988.
[35] J.M. Ziman., Principles of the Theory of Solids., Cam-
bridge University Press 1972.