Electronic eﬀects on the radiation damage in high-entropy alloys
Okan K. Orhan,1 Mohamed Hendy,1 and Mauricio Ponga1, ∗
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia,
2054 - 6250 Applied Science Lane, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
High-entropy alloys (HEAs) are exceptional candidates for radiation-resistant materials due to
their complex local chemical environment and slow defect migration. Despite commonly overlooked,
electronic eﬀects on defects evolution in radiation environments also play a crucial role by dissipat-
ing excess energy through electron-phonon coupling and electronic heat conduction during cascade
events. We present a systematic study on electronic properties in random-solid solutions (RSS) in
four and ﬁve principal elements HEAs and their eﬀect on defect formation, clustering, and recom-
bination. Electronic properties, including electron-phonon coupling factor (Ge−ph), the electronic
speciﬁc heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), are computed within ﬁrst-principles
calculations. Using the two-temperature molecular dynamics simulations, we show that the electron-
phonon coupling factor and electronic speciﬁc heat play a critical role in Frenkel pairs formation.
Speciﬁcally, the electron-phonon coupling factor quickly dissipates the kinetic energy during primary
knock-on atom events via plasmon excitations and is subsequently dissipated via the free-electrons
conduction. We show that these eﬀects are more critical than the elastic distortion eﬀects produced
by the atomic mismatch. Of tremendous interest, we show that including lighter elements helps to
increase Ge−ph suggesting the possibility to improve radiation resistance in HEA through optimal
composition.
I.
INTRODUCTION
High-entropy alloys (HEA) are mostly single-phased
multi-principal-elements (MPE) alloys, often produced
by nearly equimolar mixing of four, or more elements [1–
3]. HEAs have been shown to exhibit exceptional thermal
stability [4], hardness and strength
[5–10], wear resis-
tance [11, 12], and oxidation resistance [11, 13]. In par-
ticular, the equimolar chromium-cobalt-iron-nickel HEA
(CrFeCoNi) has attracted considerable interest as it can
serve as a base template to exploring non-equimolar com-
positions, or adding other elements such as manganese
(Mn), copper (Cu), aluminum (Al), titanium (Ti), nio-
bium (Nb), molybdenum (Mo) and many more to achieve
exceptional materials properties [14–21].
In high-radiation environments, highly energetic par-
ticle beams excite primary knock-on atoms (PKAs) out
when they travel through solids, which in turn create
self-interstitial atoms (SIA) and vacancies, called Frenkel
pairs (FPs).
Formation and clustering of FPs locally
distort lattices, resulting in dislocation loops and void
growth. As these FPs recombine and migrate through the
lattice, they generate signiﬁcant microstructural changes
over time, critically aﬀecting the mechanical properties
of materials subjected to radiation environments. Clus-
tering of defected atoms commonly reduces the struc-
tural integrity of materials by causing swelling, creep,
and irradiation-induced stress corrosion cracking [22].
In the case of HEA, the complex local chemical en-
vironment and atomic-size mismatch create well-known
elastic lattice distortions and core eﬀects such as sluggish
diﬀusion kinetics [3]. These eﬀects help to reduce defect
∗Corresponding author: mponga@mech.ubc.ca
formation, slow down defect diﬀusion and accumulation,
and promote vacancy-interstitial recombination, leading
to lower radiation damage compared to pure metals and
traditional alloys [23, 24].
For instance, CrMnFeCoNi
preserves its majority face-centered cubic phase even over
40 DPA irradiation throughout the temperature range of
∼298 −773 K [25]. Thus, HEAs are promising candi-
dates for structural materials exposed to high-radiation
environments [18, 26] such as in nuclear reactors [18, 27]
and other environments such as space applications [26].
Due to the many challenges that appear during the
testing of materials under radiation environments, ex-
perimental studies are diﬃcult to perform and time-
consuming. At the same time, since the formation, mi-
gration, clustering, as well as recombination of defects
occur within a few femtoseconds (fs) to nanoseconds (ns)
of the primary cascade event, it is pretty challenging to
in-situ unravel mechanisms behind the defect evolution.
Thus, the community heavily relies on numerical simula-
tions to understand and predict radiation damage under
radiation, especially for novel materials. In that sense,
atomistic simulations based on either molecular dynamics
(MD) or ab-initio molecular dynamics provide a frame-
work to study materials under radiation environments
systematically [18, 28].
Being an atomistic technique,
MD fully resolves the time and atomic environment and
naturally describes the interactions between PKA and
lattice, generating defects as the PKA losses its energy.
These insights can then be incorporated in Monte-Carlo
codes to predict damage in macroscopic specimens such
as those used in engineering applications [29]. However,
a drawback of classical MD is that it neglects electronic
eﬀects in materials.
In metallic materials such as HEA, the excess en-
ergy due to high-radiation exposure is deposited into
phonons and electrons, resulting in defect formation and
arXiv:2203.03779v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  26 Nov 20222
microstructural changes. Remarkably, the primary heat
carriers in metallic materials are free electrons, which re-
sult in thermal conductivities that are much higher than
the lattice contribution [30]. However, in MPE alloys,
these contributions have to be carefully analyzed since
they might change depending on the composition and
defect population [31, 32]. Therefore, incorporating elec-
tronic eﬀects in radiation damage is paramount for metal-
lic materials to accurately understand and predict the
damage.
Due to the potential applications of MPE alloys as
radiation-resistant materials, several studies have re-
cently investigated their performance using a combina-
tion of experiments and numerical simulations, provid-
ing a fundamental understanding of the damage mecha-
nisms during radiation in MPE alloys [28, 33–36]. Re-
markably, while the numerical simulations carried out
in these studies include phonon eﬀects in MPE alloys,
electronic eﬀects have been almost completely ignored in
these works, making these results applicable -but also es-
sentially limited- to small PKA energies. In particular,
electronic eﬀects become more predominant at moderate
to high PKA energies since they trigger extremely high
electronic temperatures, as locally observed on irradiated
surfaces [37]. However, MD lacks quantum-mechanical
eﬀects required to capture electronic and electron-phonon
(e −ph) coupling eﬀects. Even though MD is a classi-
cal technique, is it possible to partially incorporate elec-
tronic eﬀects within semi-empirical approaches such as
the so-called two-temperature model [38–48]. However,
these models require several temperature-dependent ma-
terial parameters that are challenging to compute and, in
many cases, remain unavailable. This lack of parameters
is more accentuated in novel materials where properties
are unavailable to the scientiﬁc community.
First-principles simulations provide valuable insights
into the electronic properties of materials, especially
in novel compositions.
Typically, such simulations are
heavily constrained by system size and spatial complex-
ity [49, 50].
In particular, it is challenging to accu-
rately represent statistical representation of conﬁgura-
tional disorderliness as in HEA cases as the number of
simulation cells increases quickly with number of atoms
and species.
Indeed, if we let Ne be the number of
atomic species (or elements), Ns be the number of sites
in a multi-principal element metallic alloy, and Ni be
the number of atoms of the i−th element, and using
the combination notation, the number of possible rep-
resentations (Ncells) becomes Ncells =
Ne
Y
i=1

Ri
Ni

[51]. Ri
is the remaining number of sites deﬁned as Ri = Ns
when i=1; else Ri = Ns −
i−1
X
j=1
Nj−1. Noteworthy, the
number of possible representations increases quickly with
the number of sites and elements, and therefore, sev-
eral realizations using large supercells are needed to ob-
tain statistically meaningful results. The most compu-
tationally intensive way of tacking this issue is to use
a large number of supercells, albeit there is not robust
way to a priori ensure that the number and size of su-
percells are suﬃcient to achieve accurate statistical rep-
resentation. A more reﬁned approach is so called spe-
cial quasi-random structures (SQS) [52, 53], which has
been used for studying properties of HEAs [54].
De-
spite its more systematic conceptualization, SQS still re-
quires to appropriate choice of supercell size and clus-
tering size, which increases with the number of prin-
cipal elements.
The coherent-potential approximation
(CPA) [55, 56], in particular in its most-common practi-
cal implementations such as within the Korringa-Kohn-
Rostoker (KKR) methods [57, 58], or the exact muﬃn-tin
orbitals (EMTO) [59], has been also frequently used ap-
proach to study HEAs [60]. Recently, it has been applied
in an automated high-throughput framework to study
a large compositional space of HEAs [61]. While CPA-
based methods are highly promising to approximate a
large number of materials properties, it is still a chal-
lenging task to obtain the large number of electronic and
phonon properties required to consistently obtain the
temperature-dependent electron-phonon (e −ph) cou-
pling factor (Ge−ph), electronic speciﬁc heat (Ce) and
electronic thermal conductivity (κe) for a given composi-
tional space.
For instance, it is quite computationally
heavy to obtain phonon dispersion within CPA-based
approaches for a large compositional space [62]. Thus,
Samolyuk et al.
have used a linear mixing scheme of
the constant e-ph mass enhancement parameter (λ) of
Ni, Cr, and Fe for that of their equi-molar binary al-
loys [63]. A less robust, yet extremely expedient approach
is the virtual-crystal approximation (VCA) [64], which is
conventionally applied a linear mixing scheme to atomic
pseudo-potentials [65]. It oﬀer a disordered mean-ﬁeld
limit approximation for conﬁgurational disorderliness as
in HEAs. By construction, VCA is missing any short-
ranged ordering, or details of local chemical environment.
However, it is highly suitable when approximating av-
erage materials properties of disordered system such as
Ge−ph, Ce and κe, which are commonly approximated by
averaging over microscopic quantities. Despite its crude
oversimpliﬁcation, it has been shown that VCA is rela-
tive accurate when calculating elastic constant, simple-
phase transformation, and thermodynamic functions of
HEAs [66]. In particular, it can provide suitable tools
when trend analysis throughout a composition space due
to equally present systematic errors within it. The VCA
approximation is used in this work to compute average
electronic properties of HEAs including several elements
in a wide range of compositions.
This work presents a ﬁrst-principles investigation of
electronic properties in MPE alloys at several molar com-
positions.
The temperature-dependent Ge−ph, Ce and
κe are calculated within fully ﬁrst-principles approaches.
There has been previous works [63, 67–69] on elemental
metals and binary alloys, partially carrying the electronic
temperature eﬀects. In this work, the underlying quanti-3
ties such as λ, the Eliashberg function, the Fermi velocity,
the plasmon lifetime and the electronic thermal conduc-
tivity are directly calculated for each electronic temper-
ature point between 100 −30000 K for each composi-
tion. Additionally, the inﬂuence of the electronic eﬀects
in an equimolar CoCrFeNi HEA is investigated under ra-
diation environments within MD simulations incorporat-
ing the electronic eﬀects using the local two-temperature
molecular dynamics (ℓ2T-MD) method [46, 70]. For the
ﬁrst time, our work provides accurate ﬁrst-principles elec-
tronic data for MPE alloys and shows the importance of
these eﬀects in radiation damage. Remarkably, we have
found that neglecting these eﬀects could lead to large
overestimations of the FP population (up to ∼20−25%)
even at low PKA energies of 50 keV. An expedient
model is developed to predict vacancy formation for
the compositional space of Cr-Fe-Co-Ni. Temperature-
dependent ﬁrst-principles electronic, and phonon prop-
erties database, and MD defect-evolution database are
made available in the repository at Ref. 71.
II.
THEORETICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL
METHODOLOGY
A.
Calculating ﬁrst-principles electronic, and
phonon properties
Let us now describe the relevant parameters of interest
needed to quantify the electronic eﬀects in multi-PE al-
loys. The temperature-dependent e −ph coupling factor
Ge−ph is given by [72, 73]
Ge−ph = −πℏkBλ

ω2
g(EF)
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ ∂f(ϵ, µ, T e
I )
∂ϵ
g2(ϵ),
(1)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, g(E), EF, and µ are
the electronic density of states (EDOS), the Fermi energy,
and the chemical potential, respectively; f(ϵ, µ, Te) is the
Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The product of λ and
the mean square phonon frequency, λ

ω2
, is given by
λ

ω2
= 2
Z ∞
0
dω ωα2F(ω),
(2)
with α2F(ω) is the Eliashberg spectral function.
The
temperature-dependent electronic speciﬁc heat, Ce, is
given by [73]
Ce =
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ (ϵ −EF)∂f(ϵ, µ, T e)
∂T e
g(ϵ).
(3)
The ﬁnal component to describe the electronic prop-
erties of materials related to heat conduction, is the
temperature-dependent thermal conductivity, κe, given
by [37],
κe = v2
F τp Ce,
(4)
where vF, and τp are the Fermi velocity, and the plasmon
lifetime, respectively, which are also implicitly dependent
on the electronic temperature.
The three central quantities in Eqs. (1), (3), and (4)
require accurate estimation of g(E), EF , λ and α2F(ω),
vF and τp. Kohn-Sham density-functional theory (KS-
DFT) [74–78] is almost-ubiquitous ﬁrst-principles ap-
proach to calculate electronic structures of solids.
Its
perturbative extension, called the density-functional per-
turbation theory (DFPT) [79, 80], also provides an ex-
pedient approach for obtaining zero-temperature phonon
properties.
Despite rapid advancements in underlying
algorithms, and computational resources, the KS-DFT-
based implementations are severely limited in terms of
system size and spatial complexity, in particular for
metallic systems [49, 50]. It is particularly challenging
in the cases of HEAs, since it requires a large number of
supercell simulations to achieve an accurate statistical
representation conﬁgurational disorderliness.
Virtual-
crystal approximation (VCA) is an expedient approach
to study multi-principles elements solids at the disor-
dered mean-ﬁeld limit [81].
Within VCA, the atomic
pseudo-potentials [65] of constituent elements are linearly
mixed to a single pseudopotential, representing a virtual
atom [64].
In principle, DFT is an absolute-zero-temperature the-
ory.
However, it is worth to mention that there has
been considerable work on extending it to capture ther-
mal equilibrium at ﬁnite temperatures [82]. In the con-
text of this work, the extreme electronic temperature are
highly localized as it is generated by high-energy parti-
cles. Thus, the ﬁnite electronic temperature eﬀects can
be expediently included within a simple conceptual way
through the smearing parameter around the Fermi level,
representing Te, in the case of metallic systems.
With
that in mind, g(E) is expected to have a negligible T e-
dependence as it only aﬀects occupancies of the electronic
states at around the Fermi level as the practical DFT
assign occupancies after optimizing the KS states. It is
more suitable to include the possible eﬀects of T e through
EF as it does not require a large number of electronic
band-structure simulations. The T e-dependent EF can
be easily obtained using the zero-temperature electronic
structure with little additional computational cost. We
refer the reader to Refs. 83 and 84 for details on how to
obtain λ and α2F(ω), using DFPT. The T e-dependence
can be partially introduced by setting the smearing pa-
rameter used for the double-delta integral during the e-ph
coupling simulations.
Consistently, the averaged Fermi-velocity square, ⟨v2
F⟩,
can approximately given by [85]
⟨v2
F⟩=
 P
m
R
SFm dk

∂Em,k
∂k

2 
 P
n
R
SFn dk′

,
(5)
assuming that the electronic bands have parabolic disper-
sions normal the Fermi surface. SFm, and Em,k are the4
partial Fermi surface, and the KS energy of the m −th
metallic band, respectively.
In practice, ⟨v2
F⟩is calcu-
lated on a slab with a thickness of ∆EFermi using the
in-house post-processing tool [86], available in Ref. 87.
It requires a well-converged electronic band structure
on an extremely dense Brillouin-zone sampling.
The
T e-dependence can be consistently included by setting
dFermi = kBT e [88].
We point out that Eq. (5) does
not include the e −ph coupling eﬀects, which can be in-
troduced as the electron mass renormalization such as
vF →vF/(1 + λ) [89].
Ignoring any impurity, the plasmon lifetime of a metal-
lic solid can be expressed as the sum of the electron-
electron (e −e) and the electron-phonon (e −ph) scat-
terings terms within Matthiessen’s rule such as
1
τp
=
1
τe−e
+
1
τe−ph
.
(6)
The e −e term (in the Hz unit) can be estimated using
the Fermi liquid theory at the absolute-zero temperature
by [90–92]
1
τe−e
=
me4(E −EF)2
64π3ℏ3ϵ0E3/2
s
E1/2
F
 
2√EsEF
4EF + Es
+ arctan
r
4EF
Es
!
,
(7)
where m, e, ℏ, and ϵ0 are the electronic mass, the unit
charge, the reduced Plank’s constant and the vacuum
permittivity, respectively. The kinetic energy due to the
Thomas-Fermi screening length qs = e
p
g(EF)/ϵ0 given
by Es = ℏ2q2
s/(2m). By setting (E −EF) = kBT e, the
T e-dependence can be consistently introduced alongside
the T e-dependent EF. The second term in Eq. (11) is
approximately given by [83, 93]
1
τe−ph
= 2πkBλTe
3
.
(8)
1.
Computational details of ﬁrst-principles simulations
First-principles
simulations
were
performed
using
the
Quantum
ESPRESSO
(QE)
software
[94,
95]
with the external thermodynamics thermo pw pack-
age [96].
Fermi velocities were calculated using an
in-house code available in Ref. [87].
The SG15 op-
timized norm-conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) scalar-
relativistic pseudo-potentials [97, 98] (version 1.2) using
the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation
functional [99–101] were used for the four base elements
(Cr, Fe, Co and Ni), as well as the additional elements
(Al, Mn and Cu). Atomic pseudo-potential were used to
obtain the virtual atoms representing MPEs alloys within
VCA. The spin-polarization has been ignored to be con-
sistent as the spin-polarization has not been yet imple-
mented within the quasi-harmonic approximation [102] in
the thermo pw package. However, the relevant electronic
and phonon properties are needed to approximate macro-
scopic quantities by averaging over the the ﬁrst Brillouin
zone. Thus, while the local magnetic ordering may play
a crucial role in phonon dispersions, it is expected to
become less signiﬁcant after averaging, in particular for
HEAs [103–105].
The initial crystallographic information for the ther-
modynamically most-stable phases of the base elements
was extracted from Ref. [106].
Cr and Fe have body-
centered cubic (BCC) structures, while Co and Ni have
hexagonal closed-packed (HCP) and face-centered cu-
bic (FCC) structures. The FCC Ni structure was used
as a template for the initial crystal structures for the
HEAs.
Variable-cell relaxation was performed using
a common high kinetic energy cutoﬀof 150 Ry on a
12 × 12 × 12 Monkhorst-Pack-equivalent Brillouin zone
sampling (MP-grid) [107], and the convergence for the
total energies, the total forces, and the self-consistency
were set to 10−7 Ry, 10−6 Ry·a−3
0
and 10−10, respectively.
To practically mimic the extreme electronic tempera-
tures of ∼30000 K on irradiated surfaces, the tempera-
ture grid was divided into two parts such as a low tem-
perature grid of 100 −1000 K with a step size of 100 K,
and a high temperature grid of 3000 −30000 K with a
step size of 3000 K. The electronic temperatures were
consistently introduced a smearing parameters around
the Fermi levels in all simulations. The ﬁrst set of sim-
ulations were performed to obtain anharmonic thermo-
dynamic properties were calculated for the low-T e us-
ing the quasi-harmonic approximation [102] within the
thermo pw package on a shifted 12 × 12 × 12 MP-grid
for electronic structure simulations, and a 4 × 4 × 4 MP-
grid for phonon simulations. The e −ph mass enhance-
ment parameters were calculated by following the pro-
cedure in Refs. 83 and 84 with a dense 36 × 36 × 36
MP-grid for interpolation, and a converged 12 × 12 × 12
MP-grid for electronic structure simulations, 4×4×4 MP-
grid for phonon simulations. Finally, the Fermi velocities
were calculated using the in-house code starting from the
band structures, calculated on a 36 × 36 × 36 MP-grid.
Temperature-dependent electronic, and phonon proper-
ties upto 3 × 104 K have been made publicly available in
the repository at Ref. 71.
B.
ℓ2T-MD methodology
The
ℓ2T-MD
method,
developed
by
Ullah
and
Ponga [46], provides computationally feasible and seam-
less approach to simulate the electronic eﬀects in MD
simulations within the two-temperature model. Consid-
ering a system with Na atoms, each atom is provided with
an electronic temperature variable. Let (T e
i ) denote the
electronic temperature associated with the i−th atom in
the system which can ﬂuctuate locally depending on the
local environments during a cascade even [108]. At the
same time, let us introduce a maximum electronic tem-
perature T e
max representing an arbitrary upper bound to5
the electronic temperature of the system. On the basis
of this maximum temperature, we can map the tempera-
ture ﬁeld using the transformation θi =
T e
i
T e
max which maps
θi ∈[0, 1] interval.
According to Ullah and Ponga [46], the ℓ2T-MD model
electronic temperature evolution using the following mas-
ter equation.
∂T e
i
∂t = Ge−ph
Ce
T e
max
 θlat
i
−θe
i

|
{z
}
e−ph
+ T e
max
NA
X
j̸=i
Kij
h
θe
j(1 −θe
i ) eθe
i −θe
j −θe
i (1 −θe
j) eθe
J−θe
i
i
|
{z
}
e−e
(9)
In Eq. (9) the time-evolution of T e
i for each atom is inﬂu-
enced by the energy exchange energy between electrons
surrounding the i−th atom (and denoted by (e −e)), and
a coupling between electron and phonons (e −ph). Kij
is a material property that quantiﬁes the rate of elec-
tronic energy exchange between electrons near two adja-
cent atomic sites. Interestingly, Kij can be linked to well-
deﬁned properties obtained either from ab-initio simula-
tions or experimental data and is going to be described
below.
The term Ge−ph measures the e −ph scattering be-
tween electrons close to the Fermi level and phonons and
determines how eﬀectively the energy exchange between
e −ph occurs. On the other hand, the term Ce deter-
mines how much excess energy electrons can absorb. By
deﬁnition, both of these terms are always positive for
metals. A higher Ge−ph leads to more rapid energy ex-
change between e −ph, while a higher Ce allows to store
more excess energy in the free electrons. When a sudden
amount of energy is introduced in the system, there is a
rapid rise in the lattice temperature (T lat
i
), which elec-
trons around the Fermi level can partially absorb until
the electronic and lattice temperatures reach equilibrium.
We notice that θlat
i
= T lat
i
/T e
max in Eq. (9) denotes
a mapped local lattice temperature that is is classically
deﬁned by
T lat
i
=
2
3kBNc
Nc
X
j=1,
j̸=i
1
2mjv2
j ,
(10)
Nc is the number of atoms in a small cluster surrounding
the i−th atom. The small cluster is deﬁned within a cut-
oﬀradius, rc, which is equal to the interatomic potential’s
cut-oﬀused in MD [46]. mj, and vj are the atomic mass
and the velocity vector of the j−th atom.
The pair-wise exchange-rate thermal coeﬃcient Kij for
the electronic temperature can be determined by a long-
wave analysis to well deﬁned thermodynamics properties
[46, 70, 109] and is given by
Kij = 2dκe
CeZb2 = 2dv2
Fτp
Zb2
,
(11)
where d = 3 is the system dimension, Z is the coordi-
nation number of the lattice without distortion, and b is
the Burgers vector.
1.
Computational details of classical molecular dynamics
simulations
MD and ℓ2T-MD simulations were performed using the
Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simula-
tor (LAMMPS) software [110], into which the ℓ2T-MD
have been implemented by Ullah and Ponga [46]. The
ℓ2T-MD routine was modiﬁed to allow Ge−ph, Ce, and
κe to be updated with T e
i . A binary search algorithm on
a hook-up table was used to ﬁnd the correct parameters
range corresponding to T e
i , while linear interpolation was
used to interpolate the values corresponding to the ex-
act T e
i . The embedded atom model (EAM) potential by
Farkas and Caro [111] was used as the interatomic po-
tential as it can model HEA of Co, Cr, Fe and Ni and
was used previously in literature for modeling radiation
damage for HEA [28, 112]. The electronic stopping was
incorporated in the model through electron stopping ﬁx
in LAMMPS [113, 114]. The stopping-power values were
calculated using the Stopping and Range of Ions in Mat-
ter (SRIM) software [115] with a minimum cut-oﬀenergy
of 10 eV. For the sake of completeness and robustness, the
minimum cut-oﬀenergies of 1, 5 and 10 eV were tested
for CrFeCoNi within the ℓ2T-MD. The short-range in-
teractions were modiﬁed using a ZBL potential [116] to
prevent atoms from getting too close during the displace-
ment cascades. The ZBL potential was smoothly linked
to the EAM pair potential for distances between 0.05 nm
and 0.18 nm. This procedure does not aﬀect the equilib-
rium properties.
An initial cubic simulation cell with a dimension of
L = 34 nm was used to ﬁll using a generic crystal with
a lattice parameter of a = 0.363 nm with a total num-
ber of atoms of 3, 538, 944. This cell size ensured that
the radiation-induced damage was contained within the
simulation cells’ boundaries. Periodic boundary condi-
tions were employed in all three directions for all sim-
ulation cells.
The initial simulation cells of CoCrFeNi
were obtained by randomly placing Co, Cr, Fe and Ni
on the atomic sites.
We performed the following test
to validate the random generation to ensure the correct
statistical sampling. First, 512 random generations were
performed in smaller samples containing ∼500 atoms.
These samples were relaxed using molecular statics and
subjecting them to zero pressure. Then, the energy per
atom (∼−4.1232 eV/atom) and its standard deviation
(∼4 meV/atom) were measured. These samples indi-
cated a distribution close to a Gaussian of energies after6
minimization, as shown in S1. Subsequently, nine large
cells involving 3, 538, 944 atoms were relaxed under the
same conditions, and their average energy (∼−4.1229
eV/atom) and standard deviation were also obtained.
The diﬀerence between average energies was less than 1
meV/atom, indicating a large number of chemical envi-
ronments are simulated in the large sample. The energy
levels correspond to the average values of the 512 diﬀerent
realizations suggesting proper sampling of the chemical
environments.
Then the simulation cells were subjected to energy
minimization at T = 0 K using the Polak-Ribi`ere con-
jugate gradient algorithm [117]. Subsequently, an initial
temperature of T = 300 K was given to the atoms, and
the system was relaxed for 30 ps using the Nos´e−Hoover
thermostat to relax the hydrostatic pressure to zero.
The same energy minimization and relaxation procedures
were used for the Ni simulation cells.
Cascade events were initiated by randomly choosing a
primary knock-on-atom (PKA) located at the center of
the simulation cells. The PKA was given a random veloc-
ity vector corresponding to recoil energy of 50 keV in an
NVE ensemble. For the ℓ2T-MD simulation, the average
lattice and the average electronic temperatures (Tlat, and
Te, respectively) were initially set at T = 300 K before
energizing the PKA. A variable time step was used with
a maximum time step of ≤0.01 fs for the cascade simula-
tions to limit the maximum distance for every time-step
moved by the PKA atom to 0.005 ˚A. At each MD step,
between 10 to 15 Te integration time-steps of Eq. (9)
were performed. The total time of the cascade simula-
tions was about 32 ps, which was suﬃcient for the FPs
to reach steady states. Each cascade simulation was re-
peated ∼20 times with diﬀerent random PKA directions
and HEA structures to ensure suﬃcient statistical rep-
resentation. To ensure this, the mean values of the to-
tal numbers of defected atoms (Ndef) and Frenkel pairs
(NFP) was analyzed for the randomly selected subsets
of the cascade simulations with respect to the number of
simulations, shown in Fig. S13 and Fig. S14, respectively.
Our analysis indicates that the total number of cascade
simulations for each case reaches to convergence within
±5% accuracy of the overall mean value of all available
simulations for each case.
The common-neighbor analysis (CNA) [118] was used
to identify formations of defect clusters.
The Ovito
software was used for visualization of the defect struc-
tures [119], and the DXA algorithm was used for disloca-
tion loops analysis [120]. Finally, the Wigner-Seitz defect
analysis was performed to determine the vacancies and
the self-interstitial atoms (SIA) using the Ovito software.
The related database of defect evolutions in Ni, and
CrFeCoNi within the conventional MD, and the ℓ2T-MD
has been made publicly available in the repository at
Ref. 71.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We start with thermodynamic and mechanical stability
assessments of our base HEA (CrFeCoNi) and its PEs.
The mixing Gibbs free energy (Gmix) is an ubiquitous
indicator for thermodynamic stability [121]. In Fig. 1,
the mixing Gibbs free energy (Gmix) and the individ-
ual contributions to it are shown up to 1000 K. The
conﬁgurational-entropy contribution is the predominant
term, leading to thermal stability at a low temperature.
At the same time, the mixing electronic and the mix-
ing vibrational Helmholtz free energies (F mix
el
, and F mix
vib ,
respectively) are negligible (see the Supplementary Ma-
terials (SM) for the details to calculate the free energies,
and the conﬁgurational entropy). Addition to the ther-
modynamic stability, the elastic and dynamic stability
is crucial to assess the mechanical stability. The elastic
stability is assessed using the Born-Huang-stability crite-
ria [122, 123] (see the SM for the necessary and suﬃcient
condition for cubic symmetry). The dynamic stability is
assessed by analyzing phonon dispersions [124].
CrFe-
CoNi is both elastically stable according to the Born-
Huang-stability criteria and dynamically stable as it has
neither negative nor soft phonon modes [124].
FIG. 1.
Temperate dependent mixing Gibbs free energy
(Gmix) for CrFeCoNi in RSS. Mixing electronic, and vibra-
tional Helmholtz free energies (F mix
el
and F mix
vib , respectively),
and the conﬁgurational-entropy contribution (−T∆Sconf) also
shown in the plot. See SM for calculations details.
In Fig. 2, Ge−ph, Ce, and κe are depicted for the four
pure elements, and their equimolar FCC RSS. Ge−ph ex-
hibits quite similar trends for CrFeCoNi and the pure el-
ements, exponentially vanishing with the increasing tem-
perature. The integral term in Eq. (1) predominantly sets
this trend when the individual terms are further analyzed
as shown in Figs. S2 and S3. However, the non-integral
terms for each system roughly average to the same or-
der and determine magnitudes of Ge−ph. It becomes in
order of 1 at around 500 K, indicating that electrons be-
come too fast for e −ph scattering. On the other hand,
Ce almost-linearly increases with the increasing T e. This
results to a rapid Ge−ph/Ce →0 for T e above 500 K.
This indicates that there will be very little energy trans-
fer from electrons to lattice when T e
i >> T lat
j . On the7
FIG. 2. Temperature dependence of the e −ph coupling factor (Ge−ph), the electronic speciﬁc heat (Ce), and the electronic
thermal conductivity (κe) of the base PEs, and the FCC CrFeCoNi.
other hand, despite also decreasing κe/Ce ratio, there
will still be energy dissipation, mediated solely by elec-
trons. This scenario is desirable to keep FPs formation by
dissipating excess energy among electrons while avoiding
further energizing the lattice.
Comparing Ce of CrFeCoNi with the pure elements,
we observed that CrFeCoNi has a higher Ce, hinting that
electrons have a better capacity to absorb energy com-
pared to the pure metals. This eﬀect could be important
in radiation environments as the plasmons take on more
thermal energy, which is removed from the lattice and
thus could result in less FP formation. At lower temper-
atures, Cr exhibits higher κe compared to other PEs and
CrFeCoNi, while CrFeCoNi, Co, and Ni performs better
at higher electronic temperatures (i.e., T e ≳6000 K).
The trends in κe are predominantly determined by vF,
portrayed in Figs. S2 and S3, as well as λ as it renor-
malize vF by including e −ph coupling eﬀects. This ef-
fect leads to remarkable poor performance for Fe as it
has the slowest vF with the largest λ. Despite its not-so-
superior κe when compared to those of the PEs, CrFe-
CoNi has a much higher Ce. It leads to a much smaller
Kij ∝= v2
Fτp, indicating that while its electrons could
hold more energy for the same electronic temperature,
they are less eﬀective in dissipating it compared to the
PEs. In summary, CrFeCoNi is expected to absorb ex-
cess lattice energy more eﬀectively via e −ph coupling
compared to the PEs, while less eﬀective to dissipate it
via e −e coupling except for Fe.
A.
Compositional space of non-equimolar
Cr-Fe-Co-Ni random solid solutions
Higher Ge−ph and Ce are the key factors for a supe-
rior radiation-damage resistance in HEA. Thus, a poten-
tial strategy to improve radiation damage properties is
to tune molar fractions of PEs to further improve these
properties. We investigate the compositional space of the
Cr-Fe-Co-Ni RSS. For a systematic yet feasible investiga-
tion, we vary each PE at a time on a molar-fraction grid
of x = [0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15] while keeping the remaining
three elements equimolar among themselves. The x = 0
cases are the equimolar 3-PEs cases; however, the non-
CrFeCoNi cases are called the non-equimolar cases for
simplicity. By varying each PE one by one, the individ-
ual eﬀect of each PE can be partially assessed, although
reducing a single PE automatically increases the molar
fraction of the remaining three.
The ﬁrst step is to assess the relative stability of the8
non-equimolar RSS. In Fig. 3, the Gibbs free energy dif-
ferences (∆G) of the RSS compared to the CoCrFeNi
are illustrated up to 1000 K. Reducing Cr or Fe leads to
thermally less stable compositions by increasing G while
reducing Ni has an opposite eﬀect. Reducing the molar-
fraction of Co has a less signiﬁcant eﬀect on the thermal
stability, and this is consistent with previous studies car-
ried out in ﬁve PE alloys [21].
At room temperature
(300 K), a reduction up to 20% of Cr or Fe, or a reduc-
tion of Co only leads to ∆G in the order of 1 meV, which
is in the order of the accuracy of the practical DFT simu-
lations. Reduction of Ni already leads to better thermal
stability; thus, it is thermally more favorable in any case.
The non-equimolar RSS are also elastically stable accord-
ing to the Born-Huang-stability criteria. They are also
dynamically stable except for CoCrFe (Nix(CoCrFe)1−x
for x = 0) as it has negative phonon modes at around
the X high-symmetry point in the ﬁrst Brillouin zone of
the primitive FCC unit cell.
In Fig. 4, dimensionless ratios G
x
e−ph, C
x
e and κx
e for
non-equimolar compositions are shown to assess their rel-
ative performance in dissipating excess energy. The di-
mensionless ratios are computed as the ratio of Ge−ph,
Ce and κe of the non-equimolar RSS to those of CoCr-
FeNi . Reducing Cr concentration (ﬁrst column in Fig. 4)
quickly worsen Ge−ph and Ce starting at around the room
temperature. It indicates that the lower Cr concentra-
tion can lead to less eﬀective energy exchange between
e −ph, shown to play a crucial role in promoting defect
recombination and reducing defect clustering.
Reduc-
ing Fe or Co concentrations (central columns in Fig. 4)
have subtle eﬀects on Ge−ph, Ce and κe. On the other
hand, a 25 −50% reduction of Cr signiﬁcantly improves
purely electronic heat dissipation, hinted by much higher
κe. However, the comparative analysis carried out later
on in Section III C for Ni and CrFeCoNi indicates that
the e −e term in Eq. (9) has a lesser eﬀect on the de-
fect evolution. At the lower temperatures (T < 1000 K)
(the inset ﬁgures in Fig. 4), lower Ni concentrations im-
prove Ge−ph with a less signiﬁcant loss in Ce. Unlike Cr,
lower Ni concentrations drastically worsen κe (∼50%)
at lower temperatures. The composition-dependent rela-
tive changes in Ge−ph are determined mainly by ratios of
the electron-phonon mass enhancement parameters (λ),
while the ratios of the Fermi velocities primarily deter-
mine the general trends in κe (vF), shown in Figs. S4 - S7.
B.
Equimolar additions of Al, Mn, or Cu
Another strategy to tailor the electronic and phonon
parameters is to add other elements rather than explor-
ing non-equimolar compositions. In Fig. 5, the relative
thermal stabilities of equimolar AlCrFeCoNi, CrMnFe-
CoNi (also known as Cantor alloy), and CrFeCoNiCu are
shown with respect to CrFeCoNi. While introducing Al
or Mn leads to better thermal stability, CrFeCoNiCu be-
comes less thermally stable. However, it is still thermally
stable in its own merit as indicated its mixing Gibbs free
energy, shown in Fig. S11 using the thermal data for
the elemental Cu from Ref. 88 While all three RSS are
elastically stable according to the Born-Huang-stability
criteria, only CrMnFeCoNi and CrFeCoNiCu are dynam-
ically stable as AlCrFeCoNi has negative phonon modes
at around L high-symmetry point in the ﬁrst Brillouin
zone of the primitive FCC unit cell.
FIG. 5.
Temperature dependent Gibbs free energy diﬀer-
ences (∆G) for equimolar AlCrFeCoNi, CrMnFeCoNi, and
CrFeCoNiCu compared to the CrFeCoNi.
In Fig. 6, the relative performance of the electronic
(G
Al/Mn/Cu
e−ph
, C
Al/Mn/Cu
e
and κAl/Mn/Cu
e
) properties com-
pared to CrFeCoNi are shown.
The very ﬁrst obser-
vation is that the addition of Al drastically increases
Ge−ph [125], as well as substantially increases Ce and
κe by more or less ∼2 times compared to those of Cr-
FeCoNi.
On the other hand, the addition of Mn has
almost-no eﬀect on Ge−ph, Ce, or κe. Finally, the addi-
tion of Cu worsens Ge−ph and improves κe ∼1.5 times
while almost no eﬀect on Ce.
The drastic increase in Ge−ph of AlCrFeCoNi is mostly
due to the integral term in Eq. (1), as well as higher
λ

ω2
and lower g(EF), as displayed in Figs. S9 and S8.
The higher λ values can be mainly attributed to lower
averaged mass as phonon modes are normalized with the
average mass of the unit cell. On the other hand, intro-
ducing Mn, which is most-alike to CrFeCoNi in terms of
its averaged atomic mass and VEC, has the most neg-
ligible eﬀects on the EDOS and phonon DOS (PDOS);
thus, Ge−ph is almost identical except at the very low
temperatures. In the case of CrFeCoNiCu, the lower λ
alongside negligible increment in other signiﬁcant terms
in Eq. (1), shown in Fig. S12, leads to a lower Ge−ph.
In the case of Ce, the EDOS is the principal ﬁgure
of merit, as imposed by Eq. (3) (in particular, due to
µ ≈EF) When comparing the EDOS of the four systems
in the top-right panel of Fig. S8, the EDOS of CrFeCoNi,
CrMnFeCoNi, and CrFeCoNiCu are pretty similar. On
the other hand, AlCrFeCoNi has lower yet more spread-
out EDOS, leading to higher Ce. With that in mind, the
higher κe of AlCrFeCoNi is due to its higher Ce, as well
as its faster free electrons despite shorter-living, shown in9
FIG. 3. Temperature dependent Gibbs free energy diﬀerences (∆G) for non-equimolar compositions compared to the CrFeCoNi
random solid solution.
FIG. 4. Temperature dependence the electronic property ratios for non-equimolar compositions compared to CrFeCoNi. The
e −ph coupling factor ratio (G
x
e−ph), the fractional electronic speciﬁc heat (C
x
e), and the fractional electronic thermal conduc-
tivity (κx
e) fractions for non-equimolar random-solid solutions compared to CrFeCoNi.
Fig. S9. Without any contribution from Ce, the almost-
identical κe of CrMnFeCoNi is due to counter-balancing
of changes in vF and τp. On the other hand, CrFeCoNiCu
has faster as well as longer living plasmons, leading to
slightly higher κe. As τp is inversely proportional to λ
via Eq. (8), which is the predominant term in Eq. (11), a
higher λ leads to a lower τp. Similarly, vF is renormalized
by (1 + λ), a higher λ lower it. However, a steeper band
dispersion can compensate for this reduction, as in the
case of AlCrFeCoNi.10
When introducing additive elements,
the relative
changes in Ge−ph and κe are determined by both elec-
tronic and phonon properties, while Ce is purely elec-
tronic.
In the case of κe, it is also dependent on ﬁne
details of electronic band dispersion and Fermi surface.
C.
Benchmark: Defect evolution in Ni and
CrFeCoNi
Despite its relatively well-scalability, accurate MD sim-
ulations are still computationally challenging, particu-
larly to achieve a reasonable statistical representation of
HEAs. Thus, the elemental Ni and CrFeCoNi are chosen
as the benchmark cases to simulate the defect evolution.
FIG. 7.
Time evolution of the average lattice (Tlat) and elec-
tronic (Te) temperatures for Ni and CrFeCoNi within the con-
ventional MD and ℓ2T-MD for a 50 keV PKA. The mean val-
ues of the repeated eight simulations are shown with dashed
lines.
We start by analyzing the time evolution of the aver-
age temperatures depicted in Fig. 7. For both materials,
the initial average Tlat spike to ∼408 K from the initial
300 K due to the additional kinetic energy of PKA. We
also notice that for the ℓ2T-MD simulations, the average
electronic temperature also shown in Fig. 7 remains at
300 K at t = 0 ps. For classic MD and ℓ2T-MD sim-
ulations, the lattice temperature showed a quick dip at
around ∼0.25 ps in Tlat (listed in Table S2) as the PKA
transfer energy to the surrounding atoms and rapidly
generated defects.
After that, the lattice temperature
quickly stabilizes near a steady-state value that is very
similar for MD simulations (355 K and 356 K for Ni and
CoCrFeNi, respectively).
On the other hand, examining the ℓ2T-MD simula-
tions, we observed a much diﬀerent behavior. For those
simulations incorporating the electronic eﬀects, the lat-
tice temperature continuously reduced its value as time
went by, whereas the electronic temperature monoton-
ically increased.
These two temperatures eventually
reached equilibrium (at 334 K and 332 K for Ni and
CoCrFeNi, respectively) at around t = 32 ps. We also
observed that the standard deviation of these values was
around ±2 K, illustrating a very robust statistical re-
sponse of the multiple replicas used in the study. The
analysis of the average temperature of the system with
time suggests subtle diﬀerences between Ni and CoCr-
FeNi, and thus, it is beneﬁcial to investigate the evolution
of the maximum temperatures during the simulations.
Fig. 8 compares the maximum local lattice and
electronic temperatures during the cascade simulations
within ℓ2T-MD simulations. At ﬁrst glance, we observed
that the peak of lattice temperature was the same for
both materials, whereas the peak for the electronic tem-
perature was diﬀerent (see insets in Fig. 8). The time
to reach the maximum electronic temperature (∼0.05
ps) is comparable with plasmon lifetime τp and could
hint at ballistic electronic heat conduction in near the
PKA for both materials. While ballistic heat conduction
is neglected in the electronic subsystem, it is considered
through the explicit integration of the equation of motion
in the lattice. We point out that the ℓ2T-MD implemen-
tation allows for second sound simulations, and a com-
putational implementation is provided in Refs. [70, 109].
We also observed for CoCrFeNi several oscillations in the
maximum electronic temperature, hinting at local plas-
mon excitations during the PKA trajectory. As a result,
and considering that the width of the peak was much
longer for the CoCrFeNi compared to Ni, the lattice tem-
perature dropped faster for CoCrFeNi than Ni. These
facts hint at a better energy exchange between e −ph
for CoCrFeNi compared with the pure metal. Indeed, the
energy exchange between electrons and phonon is more
signiﬁcant in the case of CrFeCoNi as indicated more
prolonged survival of T e before reaching steady tempera-
tures (at around 30 ps) compared to those of Ni, reaching
steady temperatures at around 15 ps.
To better understand this energy exchange, Fig. 9
shows a graphical comparison of the local electronic prop-
erties between CrFeCoNi and Ni for the ﬁrst t = 2 ps us-
ing the maximum electronic temperature. Remarkably,
the ratio between Ge−ph for CrFeCoNi and Ni is much
greater than one below t = 0.5 ps, and eventually con-
verged to two; suggesting a much faster exchange of ther-
mal energy from the lattice to the electrons. Moreover,
Ce is about 20% greater for CrFeCoNi compared to Ni
although some variations are observed below t = 0.5 ps.
Only the thermal conductivity of the high entropy alloy
is less than Ni (about 70% of Ni), but it seems to have a
much less critical impact on the thermodynamics behav-
ior of the two subsystems.11
FIG. 6. Temperature dependence of the electron-phonon coupling factor (Ge−ph), electronic speciﬁc heat (Ce), and electronic
thermal conductivity (κe) fractions of AlCrFeCoNi, CrMnFeCoNi, and CrFeCoNiCu compared to CrFeCoNi. Note that GAl
e−ph
scale is shown at the left of the plot.
FIG. 8.
Time evolution of the maximum local lattice tem-
peratures (T I
lat), electronic temperatures (T I
e ) of Ni and CrFe-
CoNi within the ℓ2T-MD for a 50 keV PKA. The mean values
of the repeated simulations are shown with dashed lines.
1.
Electronic eﬀects in defect formation and recombination
Having analyzed the evolution of the electronic and
lattice temperatures during the simulations, we now in-
vestigate the impact on defect formation when electronic
eﬀects are included. Fig. 10 depicts the time evolution of
the defected atoms and FP in the simulations. Defected
atoms are deﬁned as those atoms that do not belong to
the FCC lattice. Qualitatively, the trends are very sim-
ilar for defected atoms and FPs.
An initial high-peak
was observed at the earlier stages of the simulations, i.e.,
τ max
def
= 0.31 ps (listed in Table I). A monotonic decay of
defected atoms and FP followed until the number stabi-
lized after τ steady = 8 −10 ps. The number of defected
atoms and FP was higher for all MD simulations com-
pared to the ℓ2T-MD simulations, and also for Ni com-
pared to CoCrFeNi (cf. N steady
def
and N steady
FP
in Table I
columns one and two, and three and four). At the ini-
tial stages of the cascade events, the steep decrease in Tlat
leads to a rapid defected-atom generation as indicated by
the sharp increase in the total number of defected atoms
(Ndef) in Fig. 10. The reduced number of FP compared
to defected atoms indicates that during the early stages
of the PKA, some defects form FP while some are only
partially defected due to lattice distortions or recombine
quickly due to the high local thermal energy. Neverthe-
less, besides reducing signiﬁcantly after a few ps, FPs
reached steady-state for all simulations after ∼10 ps.
As shown in Table I the trends are analogous as the
number of defected atoms with more FP for MD com-
pared to ℓ2T-MD and for Ni to CoCrFeNi. Interestingly,
comparing the FP at the end of the simulations, a dif-
ference of ∼26% was observed for Ni, and this is com-
parable with previous studies for pure metals [43–46].
Diﬀerence can be attributed to the temperature depen-
dence implemented in our work compared to previous
ones, where usually Ce and κe are modeled as a lin-
early dependent on Te.
However, as shown in Fig. 2,
this is only true for moderate temperature ranges and
both quantities saturate at high temperatures. Compar-
ing the FP for CoCrFeNi, the incorporation of electronic
eﬀects resulted in 105 ± 4 FPs, whereas classical MD
showed 126 ± 8, or a diﬀerence of 20% between the two
approaches. The signiﬁcantly higher Ge−ph of CrFeCoNi12
FIG. 9. Time evolution of the e −ph coupling factor (Ge−ph), the electronic speciﬁc heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal
conductivity (κe) ratios between Ni and CrFeCoNi.
compared to that of Ni, shown in Fig. 9, signiﬁcantly pro-
mote higher defect recombination, leading to lower FPs
at steady-state.
It is evident from Fig. 10 that the electronic eﬀects
shorten the time scale to reach the steady states FPs.
Thus, we conclude that the electronic eﬀects play a more
critical role in determining the ﬁnal number of FPs after
the PKA, and these eﬀects are more critical than those
made by the elastic distortions present in high-entropy al-
loys. To better explain this ﬁnding, we computed the SIA
(s1
f) and vacancy formation (v1
f) energies in the HEA and
compared to Ni and these results are shown in Fig. S15
and Fig. S16 and listed in Table S3. For instance, the
vacancy formation energy in CoCrFeNi has a Gaussian
distribution owing to the elastic distortions.
However,
when analyzed on average, we observed that the forma-
tion energy v1
f ≈1.64 eV which is very close to one in
Ni, v1
f = 1.56 eV. These small diﬀerences suggest that
the energetic cost of generating a vacancy is not strongly
aﬀected by the elastic distortions and thus, cannot dras-
tically reduce FPs formation during the PKA event.
These ﬁndings are in line with previous results ob-
tained by Deluigi et al. [28] where the eﬀect of the elastic
distortions was investigated and compared to an equiv-
alent mean-ﬁeld discrete sample. Noteworthy, Deluigi et
al. [28] concluded that the elastic distortion plays a mi-
nor role in the generation of FP during low energy PKA
events. Even though these authors did not include elec-
tronic thermal eﬀects, we observe similar trends here.
These results illustrate the importance of the electronic
eﬀects in MD and justify their inclusion besides increas-
ing the simulations’ computational cost.
For the sake of gaining further insight, the cascade sim-
ulations for CrFeCoNi within the ℓ2T-MD were repeated
for the minimum cut-oﬀenergy for the electronic stop-
ping, listed in Table S1. The minimum cut-oﬀenergies
(1, 5, and 10 eV) do not have any signiﬁcant eﬀects on
the numbers of the defected atoms and/or Frenkel pairs.
2.
Electronic eﬀects in defect clustering
Another important factor in comparing the classical
MD and ℓ2T-MD simulations is the size of the defected
cluster resulting after the cascade simulations. To this
end, we graphically represented the cluster size (as de-
noted by the defected atoms in diﬀerent defect clusters
in the simulations) for twenty clusters as shown in Fig. 11
and also visualized in Fig. S17. Again, results for MD and
ℓ2T-MD for Ni and CoCrFeNi are compared.
Ni generates larger defect clusters without the elec-
tronic eﬀects, as much as ∼1.5 times larger ones than
those of CrFeCoNi. When the electronic eﬀects are in-
cluded, this ratio rises to ∼2. Smaller Scluster in CoCr-
FeNi compared to Ni can be attributed to better en-
ergy exchange between e −ph (Ge−ph) and heat capacity
(Ce−ph). Remarkably, the lower values of thermal con-
ductivity (κCrFeCoNi
e
, displayed in Fig. 9) of the high en-
tropy alloy compared to Ni play a much more modest role
in determining the FPs and cluster size. Despite diﬀerent
lattice distortion, the electronic eﬀects reduce Smax
cluster by
∼34% in CrFeCoNi compared a reduction of ∼30% in
Ni.
Fig. 12 exhibits the steady-state fractions of FPs per
principal elements are shown for CrFeCoNi. Even though
at the initial stages of the cascade simulation, the FPs
are equally distributed in all elements (not shown in the
ﬁgure), the distribution quickly shifts and reaches the dis-
tribution as illustrated in Fig. 12. As clearly portrayed in
the graphical representation, Cr disproportionately forms
more FPs while Fe and Co contribute less to the total
FPs population. This disparity in the FPs proportion is
simply due to lower vacancy and SIA-formation energies
of Cr compared to other PEs, as shown in Fig. S15 and
Fig. S16. The diﬀerent FPs fractions open up the ques-
tion of exploring the compositional space of CrFeCoNi for
tuning the electronic and phonon properties to improve
the radiation-damage resistance.
To better explain the distribution of FPs in a steady-
state, let us use the available information and a sim-13
FIG. 10. Time evolution of the total numbers of defected atoms (Ndef) and Frenkel pairs (NFP) in Ni, and CrFeCoNi within
the conventional MD and the ℓ2T-MD simulations for a 50 keV PKA. Each simulation was repeated eight times to ensure
suﬃcient statistical representation of cascade events.
Ni
CrFeCoNi
MD
ℓ2T-MD
MD
ℓ2T-MD
N max
def
40587 (402)
37105 (397)
42066 (345)
37441 (412)
τ max
def
0.31 (0.01)
0.31 (0.01)
0.31 (0.02)
0.30 (0.01)
N steady
def
2877 (102)
2467 (83)
2754 (80)
2483 (82)
τ steady
def
12.53 (0.54)
11.70 (0.56)
15.13 (0.61)
14.65 (0.74)
N steady
FP
165 (15)
131 (11)
126 (8)
105 (4)
τ steady
FP
9.64 (0.50)
9.43 (1.10)
9.19 (0.31)
9.72 (0.64)
TABLE I. The mean values and standard error (in parenthesis) of the maximum number of defected atoms at the peak
of the thermal spike (N max
def ), at steady state (N steady
def
), their corresponding times (in Picoseconds units) (τmax, and τsteady,
respectively), and the number of Frenkel pairs (N steady
FP
), obtained within the conventional MD and the ℓ2T-MD simulations
for a 50 keV PKA.
ple mechanistic model to predict these fractions. This
prediction is insightful because it can help guide non-
equimolar HEAs’ design for radiation resistance. First,
let us deﬁne the average vacancy and SIA formation en-
ergy denoted as vf = PNe
i
xivf
i and sf = PNe
i
xisf
i ,
respectively, with xi the atomic molar fraction of the
HEA. At the same time, let us now assume that the
di-vacancy and di-SIA formation energies can be com-
puted.
Next, the probably that a FP formation of a
given element is given by the following biased probability,
ρi = exp(−∆vf
i /vf −∆sf
i /sf −∆v2f
i /v2f −∆s2f
i /s2f). In
the biased probability function, the arguments ∆are tak-
ing with respect to the average value, i.e., ∆vf
i = vf −vf
i .
The relative changes in formation energies shift the prob-
abilities to generate more FPs of those elements with
lower than the average values. Next, the fraction of FPs
can be obtained by using the atomic molar fraction of the
HEA considered, i.e., xFP
i
= xiρi. Using the values pro-14
FIG. 11.
Comparison of the defect cluster size (Scluster)
for each cluster in descending order of size (Ci) in Ni, and
CrFeCoNi within the conventional MD and the ℓ2T-MD sim-
ulations for a 50 keV PKA.
FIG. 12. Fractional FPs of the principal elements in CrFe-
CoNi after a 50 keV PKA obtained with MD (purple), the
ℓ2T-MD (blue). A simplistic mechanistic model results are
also included (green).
vided above and the described model, we obtained for an
equimolar HEA the following concentration of FP defects
by elements, CoFP = 0.185, CrFP = 0.436, FeFP = 0.124,
and NiFP = 0.255, which is pretty approximate to the
values found by MD while some discrepancy for Co and
Cr is seen for ℓ2T-MD. Thus, while the number of defects
can be estimated well with the available models [126], the
proposed procedure can be used to estimate the FPs dis-
tribution per element.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This
work
presented
a
systematic
study
of
temperature-dependent electronic and phonon properties
crucial during defect formation in HEAs in radiation
environments.
The FCC-phased CrFeCoNi RSS was
chosen as the central HEA due to its frequent template
material to develop other compositions.
It was shown
that CrFeCoNi has higher Ge−ph and Ce throughout the
studied electronic temperate range (up to 3 × 104 K)
compared to its constituent elements.
Using ℓ2T-MD,
we demonstrated that CrFeCoNi was more eﬀective in
dissipating excess energy during cascade events via local
plasmons, leading to lesser defect formation and higher
defect recombination than the elemental Ni. Moreover,
this work demonstrated the crucial roles of electronic
and phonon eﬀects during cascade events.
Analysis of individual aﬃnity for defect formation of
the PEs in CrFeCoNi showed that the elements such as
Cr and partially Ni tend to form more FPs due to their
relatively lower v1
f energies than with the remaining el-
ements.
It motivated us to explore the non-equimolar
RSS to improve the radiation-damage resistance further.
A set of representative non-equimolar RSS compositions
were investigated to understand electronic and phonon
properties. Lower Cr or Ni concentration (keeping the
remaining three PEs equimolar among themselves) lead
to slightly lower Ge−ph and higher κe. Reduction of Fe or
Co had negligible eﬀects on Ge−ph. Moving away from
the non-equimolar case led to relatively poorer perfor-
mance in e −ph−assisted heat dissipation, while it im-
proved energy exchange among electrons of neighboring
atoms.
The addition of Al, Mn and Cu to CrFeCoNi was inves-
tigated as another strategy. We demonstrated that the
equimolar addition of Al substantially increased Ge−ph,
which is a critical factor for plasmon excitations and to
reduce defect formation. While the equimolar addition of
Mn slightly improved Ge−ph, the equimolar addition of
Cu worsens it. On the other hand, adding any of these el-
ements substantially improved κe. These general trends
indicated that the addition of lighter elements compared
to the averaged atomic mass improves Ge−ph, consider-
ing that atomic mass is used when normalizing phonon
modes. On the other hand, the addition of atoms with
more diﬀering VEC led to higher κe due to higher vF,
despite shorter-living plasmons when adding lighter ele-
ments.
Electronic properties were then integrated into the
ℓ2T-MD model to investigate their eﬀect in FPs forma-
tion. We found that the electronic properties play a criti-
cal role in determining the steady-state FPs number after
the PKA event. Neglecting these eﬀects lead to errors of
about ∼20 −25% between classical MD and ℓ2T-MD at
50 keV PKA energy. We also investigated the fraction
of FPs per principal element in the HEA. We found that
elements with smaller vacancy formation energies (i.e.,
Cr and Ni) resulted in more FPs, whereas elements with15
higher formation energy (i.e., Fe and Co) showed fewer
FPs. This ﬁnding suggests the possibility of exploring
non-equimolar HEA compositions to obtain optimal radi-
ation resistance combining optimal electronic and lattice
properties.
V.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the support of New Frontiers in Re-
search Fund (NFRFE-2019-01095) and from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) through the Discovery Grant under Award Ap-
plication Number 2016-06114. M.H. gratefully acknowl-
edges the ﬁnancial support from the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering at UBC through the Four Years Fel-
lowship. This research partially was supported through
computational resources and services provided by Ad-
vanced Research Computing at the University of British
Columbia.
[1] B. Cantor, I. Chang, P. Knight, and A. Vincent, Mi-
crostructural development in equiatomic multicompo-
nent alloys, Materials Science and Engineering: A 375-
377, 213 (2004).
[2] J.-W. Yeh, S.-K. Chen, S.-J. Lin, J.-Y. Gan, T.-S. Chin,
T.-T. Shun, C.-H. Tsau, and S.-Y. Chang, Nanostruc-
tured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal ele-
ments: Novel alloy design concepts and outcomes, Ad-
vanced Engineering Materials 6, 299 (2004).
[3] J. W. Yeh, Recent progress in high-entropy alloys, An-
nales de Chimie. Science des Materiaux 31, 633 (2006).
[4] O.
N.
Senkov,
J.
M.
Scott,
S.
V.
Senkova,
F. Meisenkothen, D. B. Miracle, and C. F. Woodward,
Microstructure and elevated temperature properties of a
refractory tanbhfzrti alloy, Journal of Materials Science
47, 4062 (2012).
[5] K.-H. Cheng, C.-H. Lai, S.-J. Lin, and J.-W. Yeh, Struc-
tural and mechanical properties of multi-element (alcr-
motatizr)nx coatings by reactive magnetron sputtering,
Thin Solid Films 519, 3185 (2011).
[6] A. Gali and E. George, Tensile properties of high- and
medium-entropy alloys, Intermetallics 39, 74 (2013).
[7] J. Chen, P. Niu, Y. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Peng,
and J. Liu, Eﬀect of zr content on microstructure and
mechanical properties of alcocrfeni high entropy alloy,
Materials & Design 94, 39 (2016).
[8] X. Xian, Z. Zhong, B. Zhang, K. Song, C. Chen,
S. Wang,
J. Cheng, and Y. Wu, A high-entropy
v35ti35fe15cr10zr5
alloy
with
excellent
high-
temperature
strength,
Materials
&
Design
121,
229 (2017).
[9] J. Li, Q. Fang, B. Liu, and Y. Liu, Transformation in-
duced softening and plasticity in high entropy alloys,
Acta Materialia 147, 35 (2018).
[10] Y. Cai, G. Wang, Y. Ma, Z. Cao, and X. Meng, High
hardness dual-phase high entropy alloy thin ﬁlms pro-
duced by interface alloying, Scripta Materialia 162, 281
(2019).
[11] P.-K. Huang, J.-W. Yeh, T.-T. Shun, and S.-K. Chen,
Multi-principal-element alloys with improved oxidation
and wear resistance for thermal spray coating, Advanced
Engineering Materials 6, 74 (2004).
[12] C.-Y. Hsu, J.-W. Yeh, S.-K. Chen, and T.-T. Shun,
Wear resistance and high-temperature compression
strength of fcc cuconicral0.5fe alloy with boron addi-
tion, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 35,
1465 (2004).
[13] N. Kumar, M. Fusco, M. Komarasamy, R. Mishra,
M. Bourham, and K. Murty, Understanding eﬀect of 3.5
wt.al0.1cocrfeni high-entropy alloy, Journal of Nuclear
Materials 495, 154 (2017).
[14] Z. Wu, H. Bei, G. Pharr, and E. George, Temperature
dependence of the mechanical properties of equiatomic
solid solution alloys with face-centered cubic crystal
structures, Acta Materialia 81, 428 (2014).
[15] B. Gludovatz, A. Hohenwarter, D. Catoor, E. H. Chang,
E. P. George, and R. O. Ritchie, A fracture-resistant
high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications, Science
345, 1153 (2014).
[16] Z. Wu, H. Bei, F. Otto, G. Pharr, and E. George, Recov-
ery, recrystallization, grain growth and phase stability of
a family of fcc-structured multi-component equiatomic
solid solution alloys, Intermetallics 46, 131 (2014).
[17] M.-H. Chuang, M.-H. Tsai, W.-R. Wang, S.-J. Lin,
and J.-W. Yeh, Microstructure and wear behavior of
alxco1.5crfeni1.5tiy high-entropy alloys, Acta Materi-
alia 59, 6308 (2011).
[18] M. W. Ullah, D. S. Aidhy, Y. Zhang, and W. J. Weber,
Damage accumulation in ion-irradiated ni-based con-
centrated solid-solution alloys, Acta Materialia 109, 17
(2016).
[19] C.-J. Tong, Y.-L. Chen, J.-W. Yeh, S.-J. Lin, S.-
K. Chen, T.-T. Shun, C.-H. Tsau, and S.-Y. Chang,
Microstructure characterization of alxcocrcufeni high-
entropy alloy system with multiprincipal elements, Met-
allurgical and Materials Transactions A 36, 881 (2005).
[20] D. F. Rojas, H. Li, O. K. Orhan, C. Shao, J. D. Hogan,
and M. Ponga, Mechanical and microstructural prop-
erties of a cocrfe0.75nimo0.3nb0.125 high-entropy alloy
additively manufactured via cold-spray, Journal of Al-
loys and Compounds 893, 162309 (2022).
[21] O. K. Orhan, M. Isiet, L. Caparini, and M. Ponga, Ex-
ploring the compositional space of high-entropy alloys
for cost-eﬀective high-temperature applications, Fron-
tiers in Materials 8, 10.3389/fmats.2021.816610 (2022).
[22] G. Was and R. Averback, 1.07 - radiation damage using
ion beams, in Comprehensive Nuclear Materials, edited
by R. J. Konings (Elsevier, Oxford, 2012) pp. 195–221.
[23] K.-Y. Tsai, M.-H. Tsai, and J.-W. Yeh, Sluggish diﬀu-
sion in co–cr–fe–mn–ni high-entropy alloys, Acta Mate-16
rialia 61, 4887 (2013).
[24] X. Zhang, Gold nanoparticles: Recent advances in the
biomedical applications, Cell Biochemistry and Bio-
physics 72, 771 (2015).
[25] T. Nagase, P. D. Rack, J. H. Noh, and T. Egami,
In-situ tem observation of structural changes in nano-
crystalline cocrcufeni multicomponent high-entropy al-
loy (hea) under fast electron irradiation by high volt-
age electron microscopy (hvem), Intermetallics 59, 32
(2015).
[26] M. Dada, P. Popoola, S. Adeosun, and N. R. Mathe,
High entropy alloys for aerospace applications (Inte-
chOpen, 2019).
[27] S.-q. Xia, Z. Wang, T.-f. Yang, and Y. Zhang, Irradia-
tion behavior in high entropy alloys, Journal of Iron and
Steel Research International 22, 879 (2015).
[28] O. Deluigi, R. Pasianot, F. Valencia, A. Caro, D. Farkas,
and E. Bringa, Simulations of primary damage in a high
entropy alloy: Probing enhanced radiation resistance,
Acta Materialia 213, 116951 (2021).
[29] G. Battistoni, T. Boehlen, F. Cerutti, P. W. Chin,
L. S. Esposito, A. Fass´o, A. Ferrari, A. Lechner,
A. Empl, A. Mairani, A. Mereghetti, P. G. Ortega,
J. Ranft, S. Roesler, P. R. Sala, V. Vlachoudis, and
G. Smirnov, Overview of the ﬂuka code, Annals of Nu-
clear Energy 82, 10 (2015), Joint International Confer-
ence on Supercomputing in Nuclear Applications and
Monte Carlo 2013, SNA + MC 2013. Pluri- and Trans-
disciplinarity, Towards New Modeling and Numerical
Simulation Paradigms.
[30] P. G. Klemens and R. K. Williams, Thermal conductiv-
ity of metals and alloys, International Metals Reviews
31, 197 (1986).
[31] J. M. Ziman, Principles of the Theory of Solids, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge University Press, 1972).
[32] R. E. B. Makinson, The thermal conductivity of metals,
in Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society, Vol. 34 (3) (Cambridge University
Press, 1938) pp. 474–497.
[33] N. K. Kumar, C. Li, K. Leonard, H. Bei, and S. Zin-
kle, Microstructural stability and mechanical behavior
of fenimncr high entropy alloy under ion irradiation,
Acta Materialia 113, 230 (2016).
[34] F. Granberg, K. Nordlund, M. W. Ullah, K. Jin, C. Lu,
H. Bei, L. M. Wang, F. Djurabekova, W. J. Weber, and
Y. Zhang, Mechanism of radiation damage reduction in
equiatomic multicomponent single phase alloys, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 116, 135504 (2016).
[35] C. Lu, L. Niu, N. Chen, K. Jin, T. Yang, P. Xiu,
Y. Zhang, F. Gao, H. Bei, S. Shi, M.-R. He, I. M.
Robertson, W. J. Weber, and L. Wang, Enhancing radi-
ation tolerance by controlling defect mobility and migra-
tion pathways in multicomponent single-phase alloys,
Nature Communications 7, 13564 (2016).
[36] C. M. Barr, J. E. Nathaniel, K. A. Unocic, J. Liu,
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and M. L. Taheri, Exploring radi-
ation induced segregation mechanisms at grain bound-
aries in equiatomic cocrfenimn high entropy alloy under
heavy ion irradiation, Scripta Materialia 156, 80 (2018).
[37] Z. Lin and L. V. Zhigilei, Temperature dependences of
the electron–phonon coupling, electron heat capacity
and thermal conductivity in ni under femtosecond laser
irradiation, Applied Surface Science 253, 6295 (2007),
proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Photo-Excited Processes and Applications.
[38] D. Duﬀy and A. Rutherford, Including the eﬀects of
electronic stopping and electron–ion interactions in ra-
diation damage simulations, Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 19, 016207 (2006).
[39] A. Tamm, G. Samolyuk, A. A. Correa, M. Klintenberg,
A. Aabloo, and A. Caro, Electron-phonon interaction
within classical molecular dynamics, Phys. Rev. B 94,
024305 (2016).
[40] A. Tamm, M. Caro, A. Caro, G. Samolyuk, M. Klinten-
berg, and A. A. Correa, Langevin dynamics with spatial
correlations as a model for electron-phonon coupling,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 185501 (2018).
[41] A. Tamm, M. Caro, A. Caro, and A. A. Correa, Role
of electrons in collision cascades in solids. ii. molecular
dynamics, Phys. Rev. B 99, 174302 (2019).
[42] E. Zarkadoula, G. Samolyuk, and W. J. Weber, Eﬀects
of electron–phonon coupling on damage accumulation
in molecular dynamics simulations of irradiated nickel,
Materials Research Letters 7, 490 (2019).
[43] E. Zarkadoula, S. L. Daraszewicz, D. M. Duﬀy, M. A.
Seaton, I. T. Todorov, K. Nordlund, M. T. Dove, and
K. Trachenko, Electronic eﬀects in high-energy radia-
tion damage in iron, Journal of Physics:
Condensed
Matter 26, 085401 (2014).
[44] E. Zarkadoula, D. M. Duﬀy, K. Nordlund, M. A. Seaton,
I. T. Todorov, W. J. Weber, and K. Trachenko, Elec-
tronic eﬀects in high-energy radiation damage in tung-
sten, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 27, 135401
(2015).
[45] E. Zarkadoula, G. Samolyuk, and W. J. Weber, Two-
temperature model in molecular dynamics simulations
of cascades in ni-based alloys, Journal of Alloys and
Compounds 700, 106 (2017).
[46] M. W. Ullah and M. Ponga, A new approach for elec-
tronic heat conduction in molecular dynamics simula-
tions, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science
and Engineering 27, 075008 (2019).
[47] M. W. Ullah, N. Sellami, A. Leino, H. Bei, Y. Zhang,
and W. J. Weber, Electron-phonon coupling induced de-
fect recovery and strain relaxation in ni and equiatomic
nife alloy, Computational Materials Science 173, 109394
(2020).
[48] J. Grossi, J. Kohanoﬀ, and E. M. Bringa, MeV irradi-
ation of tungsten nanowires: structural modiﬁcations,
Materials Research Express 7, 055015 (2020).
[49] M. Ponga, K. Bhattacharya, and M. Ortiz, A sublinear-
scaling approach to density-functional-theory analysis
of crystal defects, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics
of Solids 95, 530 (2016).
[50] M. Ponga, K. Bhattacharya, and M. Ortiz, Large scale
ab-initio simulations of dislocations, Journal of Compu-
tational Physics 407, 109249 (2020).
[51] Using the combination notation deﬁned as

Ns
N1

=
Ns!
N1!(Ns−N1)!.
[52] A. Zunger, S.-H. Wei, L. G. Ferreira, and J. E. Bernard,
Special quasirandom structures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65,
353 (1990).
[53] S.-H. Wei, L. G. Ferreira, J. E. Bernard, and A. Zunger,
Electronic properties of random alloys: Special quasir-
andom structures, Phys. Rev. B 42, 9622 (1990).17
[54] M. C. Gao, C. Niu, C. Jiang, and D. L. Irving, Ap-
plications of special quasi-random structures to high-
entropy alloys, in High-Entropy Alloys: Fundamentals
and Applications, edited by M. C. Gao, J.-W. Yeh, P. K.
Liaw, and Y. Zhang (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2016) pp. 333–368.
[55] P. Soven, Coherent-potential model of substitutional
disordered alloys, Phys. Rev. 156, 809 (1967).
[56] D. W. Taylor, Vibrational properties of imperfect crys-
tals with large defect concentrations, Phys. Rev. 156,
1017 (1967).
[57] J. Korringa, On the calculation of the energy of a bloch
wave in a metal, Physica 13, 392 (1947).
[58] W. Kohn and N. Rostoker, Solution of the schr¨odinger
equation in periodic lattices with an application to
metallic lithium, Phys. Rev. 94, 1111 (1954).
[59] L. Vitos, Total-energy method based on the exact
muﬃn-tin orbitals theory, Phys. Rev. B 64, 014107
(2001).
[60] F. Tian, Y. Wang, D. L. Irving, and L. Vitos, Appli-
cations of coherent potential approximation to heas, in
High-Entropy Alloys: Fundamentals and Applications,
edited by M. C. Gao, J.-W. Yeh, P. K. Liaw, and
Y. Zhang (Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2016) pp. 299–332.
[61] T. Fukushima, H. Akai, T. Chikyow, and H. Kino, Au-
tomatic exhaustive calculations of large material space
by korringa-kohn-rostoker coherent potential approxi-
mation method applied to equiatomic quaternary high
entropy alloys, Phys. Rev. Materials 6, 023802 (2022).
[62] J. Zhai, R. Xue, Z. Cheng, and Y. Ke, Direct compar-
ison of auxiliary and itinerant coherent potential ap-
proximations for disordered lattice vibration: Phonon
spectral and transport properties, Phys. Rev. B 104,
024205 (2021).
[63] G. D. Samolyuk, L. K. B´eland, G. M. Stocks, and R. E.
Stoller, Electron–phonon coupling in ni-based binary al-
loys with application to displacement cascade model-
ing, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 28, 175501
(2016).
[64] L. Bellaiche and D. Vanderbilt, Virtual crystal approx-
imation revisited: Application to dielectric and piezo-
electric properties of perovskites, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7877
(2000).
[65] V. Heine, The pseudopotential concept (Academic
Press, 1970) pp. 1–36.
[66] F. Tian, A review of solid-solution models of high-
entropy alloys based on ab initio calculations, Frontiers
in Materials 4, 36 (2017).
[67] A. Caro, A. A. Correa, A. Tamm, G. D. Samolyuk, and
G. M. Stocks, Adequacy of damped dynamics to rep-
resent the electron-phonon interaction in solids, Phys.
Rev. B 92, 144309 (2015).
[68] E. Zarkadoula, G. Samolyuk, H. Xue, H. Bei, and
W. J. Weber, Eﬀects of two-temperature model on cas-
cade evolution in ni and nife, Scripta Materialia 124, 6
(2016).
[69] E. Zarkadoula, G. Samolyuk, and W. J. Weber, Ef-
fects of electronic excitation on cascade dynamics in
nickel–iron and nickel–palladium systems, Scripta Ma-
terialia 138, 124 (2017).
[70] M. Ponga and D. Sun, A uniﬁed framework for heat and
mass transport at the atomic scale, Modelling and Sim-
ulation in Materials Science and Engineering 26, 035014
(2018).
[71] O. K. Orhan, M. Hendy, and M. Ponga, Temperature-
dependent ﬁrst-principles electronic, and phonon prop-
erties,
and
molecular
dyanmics
of
defect
evolu-
tion, https://github.com/Mponga/Radiation-Damage-
in-High-Entropy-Alloys (2022).
[72] P. B. Allen, Theory of thermal relaxation of electrons
in metals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1460 (1987).
[73] Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Kang, C. Li, and P. Zhang, Tem-
perature and compression eﬀects on electron heat ca-
pacity and electron-phonon coupling in aluminum and
beryllium: Insights from ab initio simulations, Physics
of Plasmas 22, 112705 (2015).
[74] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron
gas, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
[75] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in-
cluding exchange and correlation eﬀects, Phys. Rev.
140, A1133 (1965).
[76] D. C. Langreth and J. P. Perdew, Theory of nonuniform
electronic systems. i. analysis of the gradient approxi-
mation and a generalization that works, Phys. Rev. B
21, 5469 (1980).
[77] J. P. Perdew, Density-functional approximation for the
correlation energy of the inhomogeneous electron gas,
Phys. Rev. B 33, 8822 (1986).
[78] J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S. H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson,
M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh, and C. Fiolhais, Atoms,
molecules, solids, and surfaces: Applications of the gen-
eralized gradient approximation for exchange and cor-
relation, Phys. Rev. B 46, 6671 (1992).
[79] X. Gonze, First-principles responses of solids to atomic
displacements and homogeneous electric ﬁelds: Imple-
mentation of a conjugate-gradient algorithm, Phys. Rev.
B 55, 10337 (1997).
[80] X. Gonze and C. Lee, Dynamical matrices, born eﬀec-
tive charges, dielectric permittivity tensors, and inter-
atomic force constants from density-functional pertur-
bation theory, Phys. Rev. B 55, 10355 (1997).
[81] L. Nordheim, Zur elektronentheorie der metalle. i, An-
nalen der Physik 401, 607 (1900).
[82] A. Pribram-Jones, S. Pittalis, E. K. U. Gross, and
K. Burke, Thermal density functional theory in con-
text, in Frontiers and Challenges in Warm Dense Mat-
ter, edited by F. Graziani, M. P. Desjarlais, R. Redmer,
and S. B. Trickey (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2014) pp. 25–60.
[83] P. Hofmann, I. Y. Sklyadneva, E. D. L. Rienks, and
E. V. Chulkov, Electron–phonon coupling at surfaces
and interfaces, New Journal of Physics 11, 125005
(2009).
[84] S. Ponc´e, E. Margine, C. Verdi, and F. Giustino,
Epw: Electron–phonon coupling, transport and super-
conducting properties using maximally localized wan-
nier functions, Computer Physics Communications 209,
116 (2016).
[85] M. H. Cohen, Optical constants, heat capacity and the
fermi surface, Philosophical Magazine 3, 762 (1958).
[86] O. K. Orhan and D. D. O’Regan, Plasmonic perfor-
mance of auxagycu1−x−y alloys from many-body per-
turbation theory, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
31, 315901 (2019).
[87] O.
K.
Orhan,
Quantum
espresso
post-processing
tool
to
calculate
the
drude
plasmon
energy,
https://github.com/okorhan/Drude-plasmon-energy18
(2020).
[88] O. K. Orhan and M. Ponga, Surface-plasmon proper-
ties of noble metals with exotic phases, The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C 125, 21521 (2021).
[89] G. Grimvall, The electron-phonon interaction in normal
metals, Physica Scripta 14, 63 (1976).
[90] V.
Gasparov
and
R.
Huguenin,
Electron-phonon,
electron-electron and electron-surface scattering in met-
als from ballistic eﬀects, Advances in Physics 42, 393
(1993).
[91] S. Ogawa, H. Nagano, and H. Petek, Hot-electron
dynamics
at
cu(100),
cu(110),
and
cu(111)
sur-
faces:mcomparison of experiment with fermi-liquid the-
ory, Phys. Rev. B 55, 10869 (1997).
[92] S. Dal Forno, L. Ranno, and J. Lischner, Material, size,
and environment dependence of plasmon-induced hot
carriers in metallic nanoparticles, The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry C 122, 8517 (2018).
[93] I. Y. Sklyadneva, E. V. Chulkov, W.-D. Sch¨one, V. M.
Silkin, R. Keyling, and P. M. Echenique, Role of
electron-phonon interactions versus electron-electron in-
teractions in the broadening mechanism of the electron
and hole linewidths in bulk be, Phys. Rev. B 71, 174302
(2005).
[94] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra,
R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti,
M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. D. Corso, S. de Giron-
coli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerst-
mann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-
Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini,
A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo,
G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari,
and R. M. Wentzcovitch, Quantum espresso: a modular
and open-source software project for quantum simula-
tions of materials, Journal of Physics: Condensed Mat-
ter 21, 395502 (2009).
[95] P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau,
M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni,
D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, N. Colonna, I. Carn-
imeo,
A. D. Corso,
S. de Gironcoli,
P. Delugas,
R. A. D. Jr,
A. Ferretti,
A. Floris,
G. Fratesi,
G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino,
T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawamura, H.-Y. Ko, A. Kokalj,
E. K¨u¸c¨ukbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari,
F. Mauri, N. L. Nguyen, H.-V. Nguyen, A. O. de-la
Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc´e, D. Rocca, R. Sabatini,
B. Santra, M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov,
I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu,
and S. Baroni, Advanced capabilities for materials mod-
elling with q uantum espresso, Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 29, 465901 (2017).
[96] Thermo pw:Ab-initio computation of material prop-
erties, https://dalcorso.github.io/thermo_pw/, ac-
cessed: 18.09.2019.
[97] D. R. Hamann, Optimized norm-conserving vanderbilt
pseudopotentials, Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 (2013).
[98] M. Schlipf and F. Gygi, Optimization algorithm for the
generation of oncv pseudopotentials, Computer Physics
Communications 196, 36 (2015).
[99] D. R. Hamann, M. Schl¨uter, and C. Chiang, Norm-
conserving pseudopotentials, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494
(1979).
[100] G. P. Kerker, Non-singular atomic pseudopotentials for
solid state applications, Journal of Physics C: Solid
State Physics 13, L189 (1980).
[101] D. R. Hamann, Generalized norm-conserving pseudopo-
tentials, Phys. Rev. B 40, 2980 (1989).
[102] M. Palumbo and A. D. Corso, Lattice dynamics and
thermophysical properties of h.c.p. os and ru from
the quasi-harmonic approximation, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 29, 395401 (2017).
[103] F. Tian, L. K. Varga, N. Chen, L. Delczeg, and L. Vi-
tos, Ab initio investigation of high-entropy alloys of 3d
elements, Phys. Rev. B 87, 075144 (2013).
[104] O. c. v. Schneeweiss, M. Fri´ak, M. Dudov´a, D. Holec,
M. ˇSob, D. Kriegner, V. Hol´y, P. c. v. Beran, E. P.
George, J. Neugebauer, and A. Dlouh´y, Magnetic prop-
erties of the crmnfeconi high-entropy alloy, Phys. Rev.
B 96, 014437 (2017).
[105] J. ˇSebesta, K. Carva, and D. Legut, Role of magnetism
in the stability of the high-entropy alloy cocrfemnni and
its derivatives, Phys. Rev. Materials 3, 124410 (2019).
[106] J. Zemann, Crystal structures, 2nd edition. vol. 1 by r.
w. g. wyckoﬀ, Acta Crystallographica 18, 139 (1965).
[107] H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Special points for
brillouin-zone integrations, Phys. Rev. B 13, 5188
(1976).
[108] We point out that the subindexes i and j are used in
the ℓ2T-MD method to denote diﬀerent atomic sites and
should not be confused with traditional notation within
the DFT formulations for diﬀerent orbitals.
[109] J. P. Mendez and M. Ponga, Mxe: A package for simu-
lating long-term diﬀusive mass transport phenomena in
nanoscale systems, Computer Physics Communications
260, 107315 (2021).
[110] S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range
molecular dynamics, Journal of Computational Physics
117, 1 (1995).
[111] D. Farkas and A. Caro, Model interatomic potentials
and lattice strain in a high-entropy alloy, Journal of Ma-
terials Research 33, 3218–3225 (2018).
[112] L. Qian, H. Bao, R. Li, and Q. Peng, Atomistic insights
of a chemical complexity eﬀect on the irradiation resis-
tance of high entropy alloys, Materials Advances (2021).
[113] J. A. Stewart, G. Brookman, P. Price, M. Franco, W. Ji,
K. Hattar, and R. Dingreville, Characterizing single iso-
lated radiation-damage events from molecular dynam-
ics via virtual diﬀraction methods, Journal of Applied
Physics 123, 165902 (2018).
[114] C.-W. Lee, J. A. Stewart, R. Dingreville, S. M. Foiles,
and A. Schleife, Multiscale simulations of electron and
ion dynamics in self-irradiated silicon, Phys. Rev. B
102, 024107 (2020).
[115] J. F. Ziegler, M. Ziegler, and J. Biersack, Srim – the
stopping and range of ions in matter (2010), Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section
B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 268,
1818 (2010), 19th International Conference on Ion Beam
Analysis.
[116] J. P. Biersack and J. F. Ziegler, The stopping and range
of ions in solids, in Ion Implantation Techniques, edited
by H. Ryssel and H. Glawischnig (Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1982) pp. 122–156.
[117] M. J. D. Powell, Nonconvex minimization calculations
and the conjugate gradient method, in Numerical Anal-
ysis, edited by D. F. Griﬃths (Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1984) pp. 122–141.19
[118] H. Tsuzuki, P. S. Branicio, and J. P. Rino, Structural
characterization of deformed crystals by analysis of com-
mon atomic neighborhood, Computer Physics Commu-
nications 177, 518 (2007).
[119] A. Stukowski, Visualization and analysis of atomistic
simulation data with OVITO–the open visualization
tool, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and
Engineering 18, 015012 (2009).
[120] A. Stukowski, V. V. Bulatov, and A. Arsenlis, Auto-
mated identiﬁcation and indexing of dislocations in crys-
tal interfaces, Modelling and Simulation in Materials
Science and Engineering 20, 085007 (2012).
[121] A. Fern´andez-Caballero, M. Fedorov, J. S. Wr´obel,
P. M. Mummery, and D. Nguyen-Manh, Conﬁgurational
entropy in multicomponent alloys: Matrix formulation
from ab initio based hamiltonian and application to the
fcc cr-fe-mn-ni system, Entropy 21, 10.3390/e21010068
(2019).
[122] M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical theory of crystal
lattices, Oxford classic texts in the physical sciences
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1954).
[123] F. Mouhat and F. m. c.-X. Coudert, Necessary and suf-
ﬁcient elastic stability conditions in various crystal sys-
tems, Phys. Rev. B 90, 224104 (2014).
[124] S. P. Rudin, Generalization of soft phonon modes, Phys.
Rev. B 97, 134114 (2018).
[125] Note that the scale for Al is represented at the left of
the plot and is several times higher than for the other
two elements.
[126] K. Nordlund, S. J. Zinkle, A. E. Sand, F. Granberg,
R. S. Averback, R. Stoller, T. Suzudo, L. Malerba,
F. Banhart, W. J. Weber, F. Willaime, S. L. Dudarev,
and D. Simeone, Improving atomic displacement and re-
placement calculations with physically realistic damage
models, Nature Communications 9, 1084 (2018).Supplementary Materials
”Electronic eﬀects on the radiation damage in high-entropy alloys”
Okan K. Orhan,1 Mohamed Hendy,1 and Mauricio Ponga1, ∗
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia,
2054 - 6250 Applied Science Lane, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
I.
PHASE-STABILITY ASSESSMENT
The mixing Gibbs free energy (Gmix) is given for a solid with M principal elements (PEs) by [S1]
Gmix = Hmix + Fmix −TSconf,
(S1)
where Hmix, Fmix, and Sconf are the enthalpy of mixing, the mixing Helmholtz free energy, and the conﬁgurational
entropy. Using the the enthalpy of mixing of binary bulk metallic glasses (Hij), Hmix is approximately given by [S2],
Hmix =
X
i<j
4cicjHij,
(S2)
where M, and ci are the number of PEs, and the molar fraction of the i−th PE. Hij can be available within the
Miedema model in Ref. S3. The second term in Eq. (1) is given by [S4]
Fmix = FM −
M
X
i
ciFi,
(S3)
where FM, and Fi are the Helmholtz free energy of the M-PEs solid, and its ith PE, respectively. For a non-magnetic
pristine metal, the Helmholtz free energy is the sum of the electronic, and vibrational contributions, F = Fel + Fvib.
The electronic part is given by [S5–S7]
Fel =
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ g(ϵ)f −
Z EF
−∞
dϵ ϵg(ϵ) + kBT
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ g(ϵ) [f ln(f) + (1 −f) ln(1 −f)] ,
(S4)
where kB, and EF are the Boltzmann constant, and the Fermi energy, respectively; f = f(ϵ, Te), and g(ϵ) are the
Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and the electronic density of states (DOS) The vibrational part is given by [S8, S9]
Fvib(T) = kBT
Z ∞
0
dω ln

2 sinh
 ℏω
2kBT

p(ω),
(S5)
where p(ω) is the phonon DOS. Finally, the conﬁgurational entropy is given within the the Stirling approximation
by [S10]
SM
conf = −R
N
X
i
ci ln(ci),
(S6)
where R is the gas constant.
The necessary and suﬃcient conditions within the Born-Huang-stability criteria [S11]for the elastic stability of cubic
systems are given by [S12]
C11 −C12 > 0,
C11 + 2 C12 > 0 and
C44 > 0,
(S7)
where Cij are the elements of the second-order elastic tensor.
∗Corresponding author: mponga@mech.ubc.ca
arXiv:2203.03779v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  26 Nov 2022S2
II.
MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATION CELL GENERATION AND STATISTICS
Fig. S1 shows the distribution of energies per atom for 512 realization random generations of equiatomic CrFeCoNi
with blue bars.
The histogram has been shifted such that the average energy per atom (∼−4.1232 eV/atom)
corresponds to zero in the plot. The distribution shows a standard deviation of ∼4 meV/atom. A Gaussian function
with the same deviation is shown for comparison purposes. The red bars correspond to nine realizations containing
3, 538, 944 atoms. The average energy per atom is very close to the average of the 512 realizations. This comparison
indicates that the number of local chemical environments in the large cells is properly sampled (since the energy
converges to the statistical sampling using multiple random representations) and, therefore, supports our random
generation supercell.
FIG. S1. The histogram shows the energy distribution per atom for 512 simulation cells containing ∼500 atoms random solid
solution equiatomic CrFeCoNi (blue bars). A Gaussian distribution with the same standard deviation is illustrated with a solid
black line. A histogram for nine larger cells containing 3, 538, 944 atoms is portrayed with red bars. The average energy is very
close for the large cells compared with the 512 sampling simulations. The average energy per atom is ∼−4.1232 eV/atom, and
the distribution has been centered around this value for ease of visualization.S3
III.
ELECTRONIC AND PHONON PROPERTIES
FIG. S2. Temperature dependence of the electronic and phonon quantities, necessary to calculate the electronic speciﬁc heat
(Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe) of the base principal elements.S4
FIG. S3. Temperature dependence of the electronic and phonon quantities, necessary to calculate the electronic speciﬁc heat
(Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe) of the face-centered cubic CrFeCoNi random solid solution.S5
IV.
COMPOSITION DEPENDENCE OF ELECTRON AND PHONON PROPERTIES
FIG. S4. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of Crx(FeCoNi)1−x with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S6
FIG. S5. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of Fex(CrCoNi)1−x with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S7
FIG. S6. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of Cox(CrFeNi)1−x with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S8
FIG. S7. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of Nix(CrFeCo)1−x with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S9
V.
EQUI-MOLAR ADDITION OF AL, MN, OR CU
FIG. S8. Electronic density of states (EDOS), and phonon density of states (PDOS) of CrFeCoNi, AlCrFeCoNi, CrMnFeCoNi
and CrFeCoNiCu. Fermi level were set to zero in EDOS.S10
FIG. S9. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of AlCrFeCoNi with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S11
FIG. S10. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of CrMnFeCoNi with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.
FIG. S11. Temperate dependence of the mixing Gibbs free energy (Gmix) of the random solid solutions of CrFeCoNiCu.S12
FIG. S12. Temperature dependence of the fractional electronic and phonon quantities, used in calculating the electronic speciﬁc
heat (Ce), and the electronic thermal conductivity (κe), of CrFeCoNiCu with respect to those of CrFeCoNi
.S13
VI.
CONVERGENCE CRITERIA FOR NUMBERS OF MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS
FIG. S13. The averaged maximum number of defected atoms at the peak of the thermal spike (N max
def ) for randomly selected
subsets of MD and ℓ2T-MD simulations for a 50 keV PKA. Dashed blue lines show ±5% range of the averaged N max
def
of all
available simulations for each method and system.
FIG. S14. The averaged maximum number of Frenkel pairs (N max
FP ) for randomly selected subsets of MD and ℓ2T-MD simulations
for a 50 keV PKA. Dashed blue lines show ±5% range of the averaged N max
FP
of all available simulations for each method and
system.S14
VII.
ASSESSMENT OF THE MINIMUM CUT-OFF ENERGY FOR THE ELECTRONIC STOPPING
1 eV
5 eV
10 eV
N max
def
36991 (299)
37831 (400)
37934 (349)
τ max
def
0.31 (0.01)
0.33 (0.01)
0.33 (0.01)
N steady
def
2334 (75)
2388 (91)
2368 (90)
τ steady
def
15.52 (0.81)
16.77 (0.69)
16.60 (0.84)
N steady
FP
100 (4)
103 (4)
100 (4)
τ steady
FP
10.03 (1.07)
9.83 (0.69)
9.96 (0.95)
TABLE S1.
The mean values and standard error (in brackets) for the maximum number of defected atoms at the peak
of the thermal spike (N max
def ), at steady state (N steady
def
), their corresponding times (in Picoseconds units) (τmax, and τsteady,
respectively), and the number of Frenkel pairs N steady
FP
of CrFeCoNi within the conventional MD for the diﬀerent minimum
cut-oﬀenergy for the electronic stopping.
VIII.
TIME EVOLUTION OF DEFECT FORMATION IN NI, AND CRFECONI
Ni
CrFeCoNi
MD
ℓ2T-MD
MD
ℓ2T-MD
τ at T dip
lat
0.25
0.24
0.25
0.24
T dip
lat
344
340
346
340
Tel at T dip
lat
-
304
-
306
T steady
lat
355
334
356
332
T steady
el
-
329
-
331
TABLE S2. Critical points of the averaged Tavr, and T max
loc
curves.
IX.
SELF-INTERSTITIAL ATOM AND VACANCY FORMATION ENERGIES OF THE BASE
ELEMENTS
Mono- and di-vacancy and self-interstitial atom (SIA) formation energy of each element in a CrFeCoNi simulation
cells were calculated using molecular statics method in the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator
(LAMMPS) software [S13]. The simulation cells were subjected to energy minimization at T = 0 K using the Polak-
Ribi`ere conjugate gradient algorithm [S14]. The calculations were repeated randomly for up to 1000 diﬀerent atomic
sites to explore the statistical distribution of the formation energy of each element. The SIA sites studied are the
< 100 > dumbbell interstitial sites which was shown previously to be the most stable Self-interstitial with the lowest
formation energy [S15]. Point defect energies, including vacancy and SIA di-vacancy and di-SIA formation energies
were calculated using the following equations
vi
f = Ef(N −i) −
N0 −i
N0

E0,
(S8)
si
f = Ef(N + i) −
N0 + i
N0

E0,
(S9)S15
where vi
f and si
f are the point defect formation energies, E0 is the cohesive energy per atom in the bulk, and Ef(N −i)
is the total energy in the simulation cell when the point defects are introduced. N0 = 702, 464 is the initial number of
atoms in the simulation cells , i is the number of added or removed atoms, which is i = 1 for mono-vacancy formation
energy v1
f and mono-SIA formation energy s1
f and i = 2 for di-vacancy formation energy v2
f and di-SIA formation
energy s2
f.
FIG. S15. Mono-self-interstitial atom (SIA) formation energies(s1
f) of the principal element of CrFeCoNi, calculated in CrFeCoNi
environment.S16
FIG. S16. Mono-vacancy formation energies (v1
f) of the principal element of CrFeCoNi, calculated in CrFeCoNi environment.
v1
f
v2
f
s1
f
s2
f
Cr
1.46 (0.23)
2.99 (0.30)
4.27 (0.10)
13.38 (0.62)
Fe
1.71 (0.23)
3.38 (0.33)
5.51 (0.11)
15.65 (1.25)
Co
1.69 (0.23)
3.24 (0.32)
4.94 (0.10)
14.95 (0.78)
Ni
1.70 (0.22)
3.31 (0.31)
4.31 (0.10)
13.19 (0.67)
TABLE S3. The mean values and standard deviation (in brackets) for v1
f, v2
f, s1
f and s2
f.S17
X.
DEFECT CLUSTERING
FIG. S17. Self-interstitial atom (in red), and vacancy (in blue) populations at the steady states of Ni, and CrFeCoNi within
the conventional MD and the ℓ2T-MD simulations.
[S1] D. F. Rojas, H. Li, O. K. Orhan, C. Shao, J. D. Hogan, and M. Ponga, Mechanical and microstructural properties of a
cocrfe0.75nimo0.3nb0.125 high-entropy alloy additively manufactured via cold-spray, Journal of Alloys and Compounds
893, 162309 (2022).
[S2] K. M. Youssef, A. J. Zaddach, C. Niu, D. L. Irving, and C. C. Koch, A novel low-density, high-hardness, high-entropy
alloy with close-packed single-phase nanocrystalline structures, Materials Research Letters 3, 95 (2015).
[S3] A. Takeuchi and A. Inoue, Classiﬁcation of bulk metallic glasses by atomic size diﬀerence, heat of mixing and period of
constituent elements and its application to characterization of the main alloying element, MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS
46, 2817 (2005).
[S4] A. Fern´andez-Caballero, M. Fedorov, J. S. Wr´obel, P. M. Mummery, and D. Nguyen-Manh, Conﬁgurational entropy
in multicomponent alloys: Matrix formulation from ab initio based hamiltonian and application to the fcc cr-fe-mn-ni
system, Entropy 21, 10.3390/e21010068 (2019).
[S5] Y. Wang, Z.-K. Liu, and L.-Q. Chen, Thermodynamic properties of al, ni, nial, and ni3al from ﬁrst-principles calculations,
Acta Materialia 52, 2665 (2004).
[S6] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Statistical physics (Pergamon Press, Headington Hill Hall, Oxford, OX3 0BW England, 1980)
Chap. 5, pp. 158–168, 3rd ed.
[S7] F. Tian, A review of solid-solution models of high-entropy alloys based on ab initio calculations, Frontiers in Materials
4, 36 (2017).
[S8] A. van de Walle and G. Ceder, The eﬀect of lattice vibrations on substitutional alloy thermodynamics, Rev. Mod. Phys.
74, 11 (2002).
[S9] S.-L. Shang, Y. Wang, D. Kim, and Z.-K. Liu, First-principles thermodynamics from phonon and Debye model: Appli-
cation to Ni and Ni3Al, Computational Materials Science 47, 1040 (2010).
[S10] L. J. Santodonato, Y. Zhang, M. Feygenson, C. M. Parish, M. C. Gao, R. J. K. Weber, J. C. Neuefeind, Z. Tang, and
P. K. Liaw, Deviation from high-entropy conﬁgurations in the atomic distributions of a multi-principal-element alloy,
Nature Communications 6, 5964 EP (2015), article.
[S11] M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical theory of crystal lattices, Oxford classic texts in the physical sciences (Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1954).S18
[S12] F. Mouhat and F. m. c.-X. Coudert, Necessary and suﬃcient elastic stability conditions in various crystal systems, Phys.
Rev. B 90, 224104 (2014).
[S13] S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics, Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1
(1995).
[S14] M. J. D. Powell, Nonconvex minimization calculations and the conjugate gradient method, in Numerical Analysis, edited
by D. F. Griﬃths (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1984) pp. 122–141.
[S15] O. Deluigi, R. Pasianot, F. Valencia, A. Caro, D. Farkas, and E. Bringa, Simulations of primary damage in a high entropy
alloy: Probing enhanced radiation resistance, Acta Materialia 213, 116951 (2021).