arXiv:cond-mat/0604298v1  [cond-mat.soft]  12 Apr 2006
Phase Diagram for Self-assemblyof Amphiphilic Molecule C12E6
by Dissipative Particle Dynamics Simulation
Hiroaki Nakamura a,b,∗Yuichi Tamura a
aTheory and Computer Simulation Center, National Institute for Fusion Science, 322-6 Oroshi-cho, Toki, Gifu 509-5292, JAPAN
bDepartment of Fusion Science, School of Physical Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 322-6 Oroshi-cho, Toki,
Gifu 509-5292, JAPAN
Abstract
In a previous study, dissipative particle dynamics simulation was used to qualitatively clarify the phase diagram of the
amphiphilic molecule hexaethylene glycol dodecyl ether (C12E6). In the present study, the hydrophilicity dependence of
the phase structure was clariﬁed qualitatively by varying the interaction potential between hydrophilic molecules and water
molecules in a dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulation using the Jury model. By varying the coefﬁcient of the
interaction potential x between hydrophilic beads and water molecules as x = −20, 0, 10, and 20, at a dimensionless
temperature of T = 0.5 and a concentration of amphiphilic molecules in water of φ = 50%, the phase structures grew
to lamellar (x = −20), hexagonal (x = 0), and micellar (x = 10) phases. For x = 20, phase separation occurs between
hydrophilic beads and water molecules.
Key words: dissipative particle dynamics, amphiphilic molecule, surfactant, phase diagram, packing parameter, micelle, lamellar,
hexagonal structure
PACS: 61.43.Bn, 36.40.-c, 36.20.Fz
1. Introduction
The phase structure of amphiphilic molecules has
been extensively investigated as a typical example of
soft matter physics. For the present study, we selected
hexaethylene glycol dodecyl ether (C12E6), a popu-
lar surfactant in water that has various self-assembled
structures.
The phase structure of C12E6 was investigated
by Mitchell[1] in 1983. In recent years, phase dia-
∗Corresponding Author:
Email address: nakamura@tcsc.nifs.ac.jp (Hiroaki
Nakamura).
grams at equilibrium, as well as non-equilibrium and
steady-state conditions have been investigated (see
Ref. [2]). Israelachvili proposed the packing parame-
ter as a means of clarifying the relationship between
macroscopic structure and microscopic molecular
shape[3,4]. The packing parameter p is the ratio of
the volume V occupied by the hydrophobic tail to
the product of the sectional area of a hydrophilic
group S and the “maximum effective length (l)” of
the hydrophobic tail (see Fig. 1). Spherical micelles
are expected when p ≤1/3. When 1/3 ≤p ≤1/2,
cylinders are expected, and for p ∼1, bilayers should
form.
The concept of the packing parameter is intuitive
Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science
30 October 2018and acceptable. However, calculating the packing pa-
rameter is very difﬁcult, even by computer simulation,
because it is almost impossible to derive macroscopic
phase structure at the microscopic level by simulation,
using techniques such as molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation, for example. In order to overcome the gap
between macroscopic behavior and microscopic mo-
tion, dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulation
has been proposed as a new mesoscopic motion sim-
ulation technique[5,6,7,8]. The DPD algorithm might
be considered as one of the coarse-grained methods
of molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
In 1999, using an empirical method, Jury et al.
succeeded in the DPD simulation of the smectic
mesophase of a simple amphiphilic molecule system
with water solvent[9]. Their minimal model (herein
referred to as the Jury model), which is composed
of rigid AB dimers in a solvent composed of W
monomers, was shown to be proper for the presenta-
tion of the phase diagram of surfactant hexaethylene
glycol dodecyl ether (C12E6) and water (H2O)[1,9].
In addition, one of the present authors, revealed
the dynamical processes of the self-organization
of one smectic mesophase using the modiﬁed Jury
model[10], where AB dimer is ﬂexible.
Since some of the information about the interaction
potential between particles is neglected or simpliﬁed
in DPD simulation, we need to select the dominant
interaction potential for the mesoscopic structure for-
mation. Since we do not have sufﬁcient experimental
data for the interaction potentials, deﬁning the interac-
tion parameters in DPD simulation becomes difﬁcult.
The present paper reports an examination of the
dependence of macroscopic phase structure on hy-
drophilicity by varying the interaction potential be-
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of packing parameter[3,4]. A gray ball
and a twisting black line are used to denote the hydrophilic and
hydrophobic parts, respectively, of an amphiphilic molecule. The
packing parameter p ≡V/Sl controls the shape of the aggregates.
Here, the parameter V is the volume occupied by the hydrophobic
tail, S denotes the sectional area of a hydrophilic group, and l is
the “maximum effective length” of the hydrophobic tail.
tween hydrophilic molecules and water molecules in
DPD simulation as a ﬁrst step toward clarifying the
relationship between interaction potentials and the
macroscopic structure (Section 3). By strengthening
hydrophilicity, water-particles penetrate closer to the
hydrophilic heads (A), and therefore the heads go
apart from each other. Moreover, the length of AB
dimer becomes larger, because a repulsive force be-
tween water (W) and hydrophobic tail (B) becomes
stronger. In this way, it is expected that p can be
varied and that macroscopic structure deforms.
In Section 3, we compare the simulation results and
the experiments for C12E6 and C12E8. We also discuss
about another interaction potential, that is, the head-
head (A-A) interaction.
2. Simulation Method
DPD Algorithm In the present study, we used the
DPD model and algorithm[6,9,10]. According to the
ordinary DPD model, all atoms are coarse-grained to
particles of the same mass. The total number of parti-
cles is deﬁned as N. The position and velocity vectors
of particle i, (i = 1, · · · , N), are indicated by ri and
vi, respectively. Particle i moves according to the fol-
lowing equation of motion, where all physical quanti-
ties are made dimensionless in order to facilitate han-
dling in actual simulation.
dri
dt = vi,
(1)
dvi
dt =
N
X
j(̸=i)
F ij,
(2)
where particle i interacts with another particle, j, ac-
cording to the total force, F ij, which is comprised of
four forces as follows:
F ij = F C
ij + F R
ij + F D
ij + F B
ij.
(3)
In Eq. 3, F C
ij is a conservative force derived from a
potential exerted on particle i by particle j, F D
ij and
F R
ij are the dissipative and random forces between
particles i and j, respectively. Furthermore, neighbor-
ing particles on the same amphiphilic molecule are
2bound by the bond-stretching force F B
ij. The conser-
vative force F C
ij has the following form:
F C
ij ≡



aij(1 −rij)nij if rij < 1,
0
if rij ≥1,
(4)
where rij ≡ri −rj, rij = |rij|, and nij ≡rij
|rij|. For
computational convenience, we adopted a cut-off dis-
tance of unit length. The conservative force F C
ij is as-
sumed to be truncated beyond this cutoff. Coefﬁcients
aij denote the coupling constants between particles i
and j.
Espa˜nol and Warren proposed the following simple
form of the random and dissipative forces [11]:
F R
ij = σω(rij)nij
ζij
√
∆t
,
(5)
F D
ij = −σ2
2T ω(rij)2 (vij · nij) nij,
(6)
where vij = vi −vj and ζij is a Gaussian random
valuable with zero mean and unit variance that is cho-
sen independently for each pair (i, j) of interacting
particles at each time-step and ζij = ζji. The strength
of the dissipative forces is determined by the dimen-
sionless parameter σ. The parameter ∆t is the dimen-
sionless time-interval used to integrate the equation of
motion. Here, the function ω is deﬁned by[6,11]:
ω(r) =



1 −r if r < 1,
0
if r ≥1.
(7)
Finally, we use the following form as the bond-
stretching force:
F B
ij = −aBω(rij)nij,
(8)
where aB is the potential energy coefﬁcient.
Simulation Model and Parameters We used the
modiﬁed Jury model molecule for a dimer composed
of a hydrophilic particle (A) and a hydrophobic par-
ticle (B)[9,10]. In addition, water molecules were
modeled as coarse-grained particles (W). The masses
of all particles were assumed to be unity. The number
density of particles ρ was set to ρ = 6. The number of
aij
W
A
B
W
25
x
50
A
x
25
30
B
50
30
25
Table 1
Table of coefﬁcients aij depending on particle type for particles i
and j, where W is a water particle, A is a hydrophilic particle, and
B is a hydrophobic particle. By varying the coefﬁcient x between
A and W particles as x = −20, 0, 10 and 20, the dependence of
the phase structure on the hydrophilicity is clariﬁed.
modeled amphiphilic molecules AB was NAB, where
the number of water molecules was NW. The total
number of particles N ≡2NAB + NW was ﬁxed to
N = 10000. The simulation box was set to cubic.
The dimensionless length of the box L was
L =
N
ρ
 1
3
∼11.85631.
(9)
In simulation, we used a periodic boundary condition.
The interaction coefﬁcient aij in Eq. 4 is given in Ta-
ble 1. In order to clarify the dependence of the phase
structure on molecular shape, we varied the coefﬁcient
x between A and W particles as x = −20, 0, 10, and
20. When the coefﬁcient x is positive, the conserva-
tive force between A and W becomes repulsive. On
the other hand, negative x gives the attractive force
between A and W.
The coefﬁcient of the bond-stretching interaction
potential aB is adopted as aB = 100. We set the di-
mensionless time-interval of one step to ∆t = 0.05.
As the initial conﬁguration, all of the particles were
located randomly. The velocity of each particle was
distributed so as to satisfy a Maxwell distribution
with dimensionless temperature T. The dimensionless
strength of dissipative forces was σ = 3.3541
√
T.
During the simulation, we set T = 0.5 and φ = 50%.
3. Simulation Results and Discussions
We demonstrated the dependence of macroscopic
phase structure on hydrophilicity by varying the A-W
interaction potential coefﬁcient x. By varying the coef-
ﬁcient of the interaction potential x as x = −20, 0, 10,
3and 20, the phase structures became lamellar (x =
−20), hexagonal (x = 0), and micellar (x = 10)
phases. For x = 20, phase separation occurs between
hydrophilic beads and water molecules. The structure
for each x is shown in Fig. 2 and summarized in Ta-
ble 2. This ﬁgure shows that the packing parameter p
becomes smaller from p ∼1 (lamellar phase) to p ∼
1/3 (micellar phase), when the interaction coefﬁcient
x becomes larger (i.e. less hydrophilic). (When x =
20, phase separation appears. In this case, the pack-
ing parameter p cannot be used to clarify the phase
structure.) Thus, we could demonstrate that the pack-
ing parameter can be varied indirectly by changing the
hydrophilicity.
Next, we discuss the dependence of the shape of AB
dimer on varying the A-W interaction. In order to ob-
tain the information on the molecular shape, we plot
the radial distribution function of the solute particles
g(r) for each x in Fig. 3. To be exact, we comment the
deﬁnition of the g(r); g(r) is the sum of A-A, B-B,
and A-B radial distribution functions. We marked the
ﬁrst peaks for each x in the upper-right frame in Fig.
3. The bond-stretching interaction in AB dimer (Eq.
8) is the most attractive force among all interaction
forces in the present model (Table 1). Therefore, the
distance between A and B in an intra-molecule corre-
sponds to the ﬁrst peak l(x) of g(r). From Fig. 3, it
is found that l becomes larger, as the parameter x be-
comes smaller (i.e. the A-W interaction becomes more
hydrophilic). On the other hand, Fig. 2 showed that p
becomes larger, when x becomes smaller. Therefore,
it is found that the a conical AB dimer with the head
particle (A) attached to a short tail (B) forms spheri-
cal micelles for large x and that AB dimer varies its
shape from cone to cylinder by increasing tail’s length
l, as x becomes smaller.
Last, we comment on amphiphilic molecule exper-
iments. The phase diagram of C12E6 is different from
that of C12E8, because the hydrophilic head of C12E6
is shorter than that of C12E8. It is known[1] that the
lamellar phase region in the phase diagram of C12E8
is narrower than that of C12E6. Moreover, the hexag-
onal phase region in the phase diagram of C12E8
is larger than that of C12E6. In the present model,
C12E8 corresponds to smaller x (i.e. more hydrophilic)
than C12E6. From our simulation, it is found that the
hexagonal phase trends to the lamellar phase, as the
x becomes smaller. Therefore, it is expected that the
hexagonal phase region of the diagram for smaller x
becomes smaller than that for larger x. This predic-
tion by simulation contradicts the experimental fact.
This contradiction derives its origin from the fact that
we adopted only the head-water interaction parame-
ter x as a variable to clarify the macroscopic phase.
It might be seen intuitively reasonable to adopt only
the head-water interaction as a descriptor for distin-
guishing C12E6 vs. C12E8. However, the difference
between C12E6 and C12E8 is not only the strength of
the head-water interaction but also that of the head-
head interaction, by which the packing parameter can
be controlled directly. As the result, we found that the
head-head interaction dominates the structure forma-
tion process of C12En series more than the head-water
interaction.
Fig.
2.
Formed
structures
for
each
potential
coefﬁcient,
x = −20(a), 0(b), 10(c), and 20(d). Each structure is shown
in Table 2. Red and white beads denote hydrophilic (A) and hy-
drophobic molecules (B), respectively. Blue beads represent groups
of water molecules (W). We set T = 0.5 and φ = 50% during
simulation.
x
FormedStructures
-20
Lα
0
H1
10
L1
20
Phase separation
Table 2
Table of formed structures for each x. Lamellar, hexagonal, and
micelles phases are indicated as Lα, H1, and L1, respectively. For
x = 20, AB molecules and W molecules are separated, as shown
in Fig. 2.
4Fig. 3. Solute particle radial distribution function g(r) vs. distance
between two particles r for x = −20, 0, 10 and 20. The function
g(r) is the sum of the A-A radial distribution function, the B-B
radial distribution function, and the A-B radial distribution func-
tion. The ﬁrst peak l(x) of each curve corresponds to the length
of AB dimer.
Acknowledgments This research was partially sup-
ported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan, Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research (C), 2003, No.15607019.
References
[1]
D. J. Mitchell, G. J. T. Tiddy, L. Waring, Phase behaviour
of polyoxyethylene surfactants with water, J. Chem. Soc.,
Faraday Trans. 1 79 (1983) 975.
[2]
T. Kato, Microstructure of nonionic surfactants, Structure-
Performance Relationships in Surfactants 72 (1997) 325–357.
[3]
D. J. M. J. Israelachvili, B. W. Ninham, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday
Trans. I 72 (1976) 1525.
[4]
J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 2nd
Edition, Academi Press, London, 1992.
[5]
P. J. Hoogerbrugge, J. M. V. A. Koelman, Simulating
microscopic
hydrocynamic
phenomena
with
dissipative
particle dynamics, Europhys. Lett. 19 (1992) 155.
[6]
R. D. Groot, P. B. Warren, Dissipative Particle Dynamics:
Bridging
the
gap
between
atomistic
and
mesoscopic
simulation, J. Chem. Phys. 107 (1997) 4423.
[7]
R. D. Groot, T. J. Madden, Dynamic simulation of diblock
copolymer microphase separation, J. Chem. Phys. 108 (1998)
8713.
[8]
R. D. Groot, K. L. Rabone, Mesoscopic simulation of
cell membrane damage, morphology change and rupture by
nonionics surfactants, Biophys. J. 81 (2001) 725.
[9]
S. Jury, P. Bladon, M. Cates, S. Krishna, M. Hagen,
N.
Ruddock,
P.
Warren,
Simulation
of
amphiphilic
mesophases using dissipative particle dynamics, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 1 (1999) 2051.
[10] H. Nakamura, Mol. Simu. (2004) in press.
[11] P. Espa˜nol, P. Warren, Statistical mechanics of dissipative
particle dynamics, Europhys. Lett. 30 (1995) 191.
5