arXiv:2006.02604v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  4 Jun 2020
Prediction of the Curie temperature considering the dependence of the phonon free
energy on magnetic states
Tomonori Tanaka∗and Yoshihiro Gohda†
Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8502, Japan
(Dated: June 5, 2020)
Prediction of the Curie temperature is of signiﬁcant importance for the design of ferromagnetic
materials. Even though the Curie temperature has been estimated using the Heisenberg model,
magnetic exchange coupling parameters widely used is thus far based on ﬁrst-principles calculations
at zero temperature. In the explicit consideration of temperature eﬀects, it is important to minimise
the total free energy, because the magnetic and phonon free energies correlate with each other. Here,
we propose a ﬁrst-principles thermodynamic approach to minimise the total free energy considering
both the inﬂuences of magnetism on phonons and the feedback eﬀect from phonons to magnetism.
By applying our scheme to bcc Fe, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant reduction of the Curie temperature due to
the feedback eﬀect. This result inevitably enforces us to change our convention as follows: we should
use exchange coupling constants for the disordered local moment state, not for the ferromagnetic
state, in the prediction of the Curie temperature. Our results not only change the fundamental
understanding of ﬁnite-temperature magnetism but also provide a general framework to predict the
Curie temperature more accurately.
The Curie temperature (TC) is one of the essential
properties of ferromagnetic materials because it char-
acterises their applicability and performance1,2.
The
method of predicting TC is, therefore, important not only
for a fundamental understanding of ferromagnetic mate-
rials but also for the material design for applications.
A typical technique for predicting TC is a downfolding
method from ﬁrst-principles calculations to an eﬀective
lattice model as below: Firstly, one derives exchange cou-
pling constants (Jij) by applying Green’s function-based
methods3,4 or a frozen magnon approach5,6. Secondly,
one builds an eﬀective lattice model such as the Heisen-
berg model and assign Jij to the model.
Finally, one
solves the model analytically or numerically and esti-
mates TC. This technique is applied to a broad range
of materials, such as 3d transition metals4,7–11 and rare-
earth magnets12–17.
Such many studies demonstrated
that the prediction technique has some predictive accu-
racy.
Such a technique usually does not include temperature
eﬀects on magnetic interactions. Moreover, temperature-
induced interactions between magnetism and other exci-
tations such as phonons sometimes make the accurate
prediction of TC diﬃcult. At a high-temperature range
around TC, there are two kinds of interaction between
magnetism and phonons.
One is the eﬀect of thermal
atomic displacements on Jij18–20. The change in Jij ob-
viously modiﬁes TC. The other interaction is the eﬀect of
magnetic disordering on phonon frequencies. Some fer-
romagnetic materials such as bcc Fe and Pd3Fe shows
phonon softening at elevated temperatures near TC21–23.
Some research groups approached this phenomenon by
diﬀerent theoretical methods23–30 and achieved the same
conclusion: The phonon softening is due to magnetic dis-
ordering near TC. Regarding the predictive accuracy of
TC, the importance of the former interaction is easily
understandable, whereas the latter interaction does not
apparently seem to be related to TC. However, we will
recognise the phonon softening due to magnetic disorder-
ing is closely related to TC by standing a thermodynamic
viewpoint.
Thermal equilibrium states at ﬁnite temperature cor-
respond to the minimum of the total free energy at
given conditions.
This is usually called as the mini-
mum principle for the free energy.
Usual procedures
to study ﬁnite-temperature magnetism is constructing
a magnetic Hamiltonian and deriving thermodynamic
quantities such as the magnetic energy and the magneti-
sation. This series of procedures is equal to interpret that
equilibrium magnetic quantities are determined through
the magnetic free energy only. This interpretation, how-
ever, collapses in the systems that exhibit the phonon
softening due to magnetic disordering. The phonon fre-
quencies are directly related to the phonon free energy.
Thus the phonon softening due to magnetic disordering
means that magnetic states aﬀect the phonon free energy
as well as the magnetic free energy. As a result, equi-
librium magnetic states should be determined through
not only the magnetic free energy but also the phonon
free energy, according to the minimum principle for the
free energy. We call this eﬀect of phonons on equilib-
rium magnetic states through the change of the phonon
free energy as a thermodynamic feedback eﬀect.
This
feedback eﬀect surely aﬀects TC as a consequence of the
change of equilibrium magnetic states. However, the sig-
niﬁcance of the feedback eﬀect on TC is unclear because
the existence of the eﬀect has been overlooked.
In this article, we propose a thermodynamic formula-
tion to treat the feedback eﬀect from phonons to mag-
netism.
The formulation results in a simple optimisa-
tion problem for the total free energy. The ingredients
to solve the problem are evaluated by ﬁrst-principles
phonon calculations and Monte Carlo simulations based
on the Heisenberg model. By applying the formulation to2
bcc Fe, we demonstrate that TC of bcc Fe signiﬁcantly de-
creases by nearly 580 K. This result proves the feedback
eﬀect is crucial for accurate prediction of TC. We also dis-
cuss the relationship between the predictive accuracy of
TC and reference magnetic states in the derivation of Jij.
Remarkably, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant overestimation of TC
in a paramagnetic disordered local moment (DLM) state
is rather a correct tendency. Quantitative description of
ﬁnite-temperature magnetism plays an important role in
both basic and applied materials science. Therefore, our
results have an impact on the fundamental understand-
ing of magnetism and materials design for ferromagnetic
materials.
We organise the following part of this paper as below.
Firstly, we introduce a new thermodynamic formulation
to treat the thermodynamic feedback eﬀect. Our formu-
lation based on the minimum principle for the free energy
is justiﬁed through the Legendre transformation and re-
sults in a simple optimisation problem. Next, we evaluate
the magnetic entropy and the phonon free energy of bcc
Fe as functions of the magnetic energy. These functions
are needed to solve the optimisation problem. Finally,
we evaluate the equilibrium magnetic energy around TC
by solving the optimisation problem. The shift of TC of
bcc Fe is estimated from the results of the equilibrium
magnetic energy.
THERMODYNAMIC FORMULATION FOR
MAGNETIC MATERIALS
In conventional thermodynamic approaches for mag-
netic materials, the phonon and magnetic contributions
are assessed independently. We start from this typical
case for comparison with our formulation. The funda-
mental relation is written as
Etot(Sph, Smag) ≈Eph(Sph) + Emag(Smag),
(1)
where E is the energy and S is the entropy. The sub-
scripts tot, ph and mag represent total, phonon and mag-
netic, respectively. Here, we consider the Gibbs free en-
ergy,
G(T, p, H) = E −T S + pV −µ0MH,
(2)
where T represents the temperature, p the pressure, V
the volume, M the magnetisation, H the external mag-
netic ﬁeld and µ0 the vacuum permeability. In the fol-
lowing, we derive the formalism for p = 0 and H = 0,
but the discussion remains unchanged for the case with
ﬁnite external ﬁelds p and H. The Gibbs free energy G
T = T0
equilibrium Emag
by the Heisenberg model
equilibrium Emag
by the minimisation of the total free energy
Gph(T0, Emag)+Gmag(T0, Emag)
Free energy
Emag
Gmag(T0, Emag)
FIG. 1. Schematic image of the free energy minimisation at
a temperature T0. Within a common framework using the
Heisenberg model, the equilibrium magnetic energy (Emag) is
corresponding to the minimum of the magnetic free energy,
Gmag (blue line). On the other hand, the equilibrium mag-
netic energy in our scheme is corresponding to the minimum
of the total free energy, Gph + Gmag (orange line).
is derived by applying the Legendre transformation.
Gtot(T ) =
min
Sph,Smag{Eph(Sph) −T Sph
+ Emag(Smag) −T Smag}
(3)
=
min
Eph,Emag{Eph −T Sph(Eph)
+ Emag −T Smag(Emag)}
(4)
=
min
Eph,Emag{Gph(T, Eph) + Gmag(T, Emag)}
(5)
= Gph(T ) + Gmag(T ).
(6)
Here we used the one-to-one correspondence between en-
ergy and entropy for ﬁxed other thermodynamic param-
eters such as V and M.
The independent assessment
in conventional approaches is based on this trivial for-
mulation.
Next, we incorporate the dependence of the
phonon free energy on magnetic states. We assume that
the magnitude of the interaction between magnetic disor-
dering and phonon frequencies can be written as thermo-
dynamic quantities of the magnetic part. K¨ormann et al.
proposed a solid treatment with this assumption27. They
treated the forces on each atom as a function of the mag-
netic energy. As a result, the phonon frequencies, conse-
quently the phonon free energy, have the dependence on
the magnetic energy (see Methods). Thermodynamically
speaking, their treatment means the phonon energy de-
pends not only on the phonon entropy but also on the
magnetic entropy. The fundamental relation thus can be
written as
Etot(Sph, Smag) ≈Eph(Sph, Smag) + Emag(Smag).
(7)
In principle, Emag also has a dependence on Sph. This de-
pendence can be regarded as inﬂuences of thermal atomic
displacements on Jij20. If we want to incorporate this
eﬀect into the thermodynamic formulation, we have to3
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
−120
−140
−160
Emag (meV/atom)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Temperature (K)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
−160
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
−120
−140
Emag (meV/atom)
0
Smag (Emag)
Smag (meV/K/atom)
Smag (meV/K/atom)
Smag (T)
Emag (T)
Tc by Monte Carlo
1522 K
a
b
~
~
FIG. 2. Thermodynamic quantities of bcc Fe obtained by the rescaled Monte Carlo method. (a) Energy and entropy vs.
temperature. (b) Entropy vs. energy. The theoretical Curie temperature TC was identiﬁed from the peak of the speciﬁc heat.
express the magnitude of the eﬀect as a thermodynamic
quantity such as Sph. However, the correspondence be-
tween the thermal displacements and Sph is not obvious.
We thus focus only the dependence of Eph on Smag.
We apply the Legendre transformation as before.
Gtot(T ) =
min
Sph,Smag{Eph(Sph, Smag) −T Sph
+ Emag(Smag) −T Smag}
(8)
= min
Smag{Gph(T, Smag) + Emag(Smag) −T Smag}
(9)
= min
Emag{Gph(T, Emag) + Emag −T Smag(Emag)} (10)
= min
Emag{Gph(T, Emag) + Gmag(T, Emag)}.
(11)
Note that the entropy (or energy) and the tempera-
ture can be treated as independent variables during the
minimisation procedure. The thermodynamic relation-
ship between the entropy and the temperature, such as
∂G/∂T = −S, holds after the minimisation, i.e. after
the Legendre transformation. The last expression is very
intuitive from a thermodynamic viewpoint: The equilib-
rium magnetic energy at a temperature T0 is determined
to minimise the total free energy (Fig. 1) as
argmin
Emag
[Gph(T0, Emag) + Emag −T0Smag(Emag)]
(12)
= argmin
Emag
[Gph(T0, Emag) + Gmag(T0, Emag)] .
(13)
EVALUATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC ENTROPY
AND THE PHONON FREE ENERGY
We demonstrate the signiﬁcance of the dependence of
the phonon free energy on magnetic states for bcc Fe as
an example. As a starting point, we evaluate the mag-
netic entropy and the phonon free energy depending on
the magnetic energy (Smag(Emag) and Gph(T, Emag)), in
order to solve the minimisation problem in equation (12).
To obtain Smag(Emag), we carried out the rescaled
Monte Carlo method31 based on the Heisenberg model.
This method brings thermodynamic quantities derived
from classical Monte Carlo simulations closer to those
from quantum Monte Carlo simulations. The exchange
coupling constants (Jij) in the Heisenberg model are de-
rived from the paramagnetic disordered local moment
(DLM) state3,32 (see Methods).
The magnetic energy
and entropy as functions of lattice-model temperature
eT are shown in Fig.
2 (a).
The theoretical TC (1522
K) is higher than the experimental value (1043 K).
Such overestimation has also been reported in previous
studies3,20,33 using the DLM state. The overestimation
has been recognised as a disadvantage of the DLM state,
and it will be discussed later associated with our results.
Since this magnetic system does not show the ﬁrst-order
phase transition, the one-to-one correspondence holds be-
tween not only Emag and Smag but also eT,
Emag ↔eT ↔Smag.
(14)
We constructed the function Smag(Emag) (Fig. 2 (b)) by
using this relationship.
Phonon frequencies depending on the magnetic energy
(Gph(T, Emag)) can be calculated by using ﬁrst-principles
phonon calculations and Monte Carlo simulations follow-
ing the previous research27 (see Methods). The phonon
dispersions and the phonon density of states of bcc Fe de-
pending on the magnetic energy are shown in Fig. 3. The
dependence of the frequencies on the magnetic energy
is represented through the parameter α (see Methods).
The calculated phonon dispersions in the ferromagnetic
(FM, α = 1) and paramagnetic DLM (PM, α = 0) lim-
its are consistent with the previous research27. Once the4
Frequency (meV)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Γ
Γ
Ν
Η
P
Γ
α = 1.0 (FM)
α = 0.8 
α = 0.6
α = 0.4
α = 0.2
α = 0.0 (PM)
Phonon density of states
FIG. 3. The phonon dispersions and the phonon density of
states of bcc Fe from the ferromagnetic state (FM, α = 1) to
the paramagnetic state (PM, α = 0). The deﬁnition of α is
written in Methods.
phonon frequencies at various magnetic energies (i.e. at
various α) are calculated, the phonon free energy can be
evaluated from the analytical form,
Gph(T, Emag) = kBT
Nq
X
q,j
log

2 sinh
ℏωqj(Emag)
2kBT

,
(15)
where kB represents the Boltzmann constant, ωqj(Emag)
the phonon frequency of the j-th branch at the wave num-
ber q as a function of Emag and Nq the total number of
q points. Note that the more disordered the magnetic
state is, the lower the phonon frequencies are. This ten-
dency means the phonon free energies of paramagnetic
states are smaller than that of the ferromagnetic state
because of the monotonicity of the phonon free energy
for the phonon frequency. Consequently, paramagnetic
states are thermodynamically stabilised by the phonon
softening eﬀect.
TOTAL FREE ENERGY MINIMISATION
We are now able to proceed to the total free en-
ergy minimisation in equation (12) by using the func-
tions Gph(T, Emag) and Smag(Emag). The minimisation
procedures are simple. Firstly, we ﬁx the temperature
at T0.
Secondly, we calculate the total free energy
(Gph(T0, Emag)+Emag−T0Smag(Emag)) for various Emag
values.
The variable range of Emag is from the ferro-
magnetic limit to the paramagnetic limit. Thirdly, we
ﬁnd Emag corresponding to the minimum total free en-
ergy. The orange line in Fig. 1 is a visualisation of these
steps. Finally, repeat these steps for a temperature range
around TC.
The equilibrium magnetic energies of bcc Fe obtained
by two diﬀerence methods are shown in Fig. 4: One is
the minimisation of the total free energy Gmag + Gph;
the other is the Monte Carlo simulations based on the
Heisenberg model (the result is the same as the blue
line in Fig. 2 (a)). Note that the result from the lat-
ter method is corresponding to that of considering only
Gmag in the minimisation of the free energy. The equi-
librium magnetic energies obtained by the minimisation
of the total free energy are larger than those of consid-
ering only Gmag. This is, as mentioned before, due to
the stabilisation of paramagnetic states by the phonon
softening eﬀect, and the magnitude of the stabilisation
indicates that the phonon contribution is not negligible
at all in the determination of equilibrium magnetic states
around TC
The stabilisation of paramagnetic states leads to a de-
crease in TC.
As shown in Fig.
4, TC in the results
of the minimisation of the total free energy (946 K) is
lower than that of considering only Gmag (1522 K), and
the magnitude of the decrease reached nearly 580 K. No-
tably, TC of considering both Gmag and Gph is dramati-
cally closer to experimental value (1043 K) than that of
considering only Gmag, i.e. TC in the Heisenberg model.
Although TC = 946 K is still underestimated the ex-
perimental value to some extent, the anharmonicity of
phonons probably compensates for the deviation. Heine,
Hellman and Broido29 investigated the phonon soften-
ing phenomenon in bcc Fe with including anharmonic ef-
fects. They show that at 1043 K, where the anharmonic-
ity is eﬀective, the diﬀerences between the frequencies of
the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic states are reduced
compared with those at 300 K. Thus the diﬀerence of
the phonon free energies between the ferromagnetic and
paramagnetic states is also reduced. This consequently
makes the degree of the decrease in TC smaller than our
result. The underestimation in our result is, therefore,
 Emag (meV/atom)
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
−120
−160
−140
0
250 500 750 1000 1250
Temperature (K)
1500 1750 2000
argmin[Gmag + Gph]
argmin[Gmag]
Tc
1522 K
Tc
946 K
576 K
FIG. 4. The equilibrium magnetic energy of bcc Fe as a func-
tion of temperature. Orange line represents the equilibrium
magnetic energies obtained by the minimisation of the total
free energy. Blue line represents the equilibrium magnetic en-
ergies by the minimisation of the magnetic free energy (the
same as the blue line in Fig. 2 (a)). The Curie temperature
TC in the minimisation of the total free energy is deﬁned as
the temperature with the same magnetic energy as the Heisen-
berg model. This deﬁnition is reasonable because the same
magnetic energy gives the same magnetic ordering as long as
Jij values do not vary.5
qualitatively correct.
The substantial decrease in TC gives a doubt on the
usual recognition of the accuracy in prediction techniques
for TC. Roughly speaking, there are three reference mag-
netic states in the derivation of Jij: ferromagnetic state,
paramagnetic DLM state and conical spin-spiral states.
The former two are used within Green’s function-based
methods3,4, whereas conical spin-spiral states are used
within the frozen magnon approach5,6.
We can sum-
marise the relationship between the reference states and
predictive accuracy of TC in bcc Fe: The ferromagnetic
state and spin-spiral states give TC near the experimental
value4–6,8,11,34,35, whereas the paramagnetic DLM state
overestimates TC signiﬁcantly3,20,33. Therefore, the fer-
romagnetic state and spin-spiral states have been recog-
nised to have an enough predictive accuracy of TC re-
garding bcc Fe. However, our study clearly shows that
this recognition is questionable because the contribution
of the phonon free energy decreases TC of bcc Fe sig-
niﬁcantly. The substantial decrease in TC suggests the
DLM state shows correct tendency regarding TC predic-
tion, rather than the ferromagnetic state and spin-spiral
states. Note that this suggestion is of great importance
for theory of ﬁnite-temperature magnetism as follows. In
the development of the theory, TC of bcc Fe has been
recognised as a touchstone: Whether the predicted TC of
bcc Fe agrees with the experimental value or not has been
an element to examine the validity of a new theory. Our
result, however, indicates such an examination way is in-
appropriate. Instead, an appropriate judgment criterion
is as follows: Without considering the phonon soften-
ing, a theory that accurately describes ﬁnite-temperature
magnetism must overestimate TC of bcc Fe.
Our thermodynamic formulation becomes complete if
we incorporate the dependence of Emag on Sph. This de-
pendence may be related to the eﬀect of thermal atomic
displacements on Jij. Ruban and Peil20 studied this ef-
fect by combining Jij calculations and molecular dynam-
ics. They clearly showed Jij values of bcc Fe were reduced
by atomic displacements, and consequently, TC was also
largely decreased compared with the case of excluding
thermal atomic displacements. The dependence of Emag
on Sph is thus important and intriguing from a thermo-
dynamic viewpoint. However, a concrete expression of
this dependence is yet to be obtained.
CONCLUSIONS
We have quantitatively evaluated the thermodynamic
feedback eﬀect from phonons to magnetism on TC regard-
ing bcc Fe. The phonon softening due to magnetic dis-
ordering lead to the stabilisation of paramagnetic states.
As a result, TC of bcc Fe was decreased by nearly 580 K
from the value in the case of ignoring the feedback eﬀect,
i.e. the value for the Heisenberg model. This deviation
in bcc Fe is of great importance because bcc Fe is recog-
nised as a touchstone for the study of ﬁnite-temperature
magnetism. We stress two important knowledge regard-
ing the prediction of TC: (i) An appropriate theory of
magnetism without considering the contribution of the
phonon free energy must overestimate TC in bcc Fe, con-
trary to conventional understanding. (ii) We should use
Jij for the DLM state rather than for the ferromagnetic
state in the accurate description of TC.
Finally, we mention the applicability of our thermody-
namic formulation. We focused on bcc Fe in this study,
but our formulation is not restricted to it. It is intrigu-
ing to apply the formulation to other magnetic materials
such as permanent magnets in which TC is critically im-
portant. In addition, the core concept of the formulation
can be applied to other interacting excitation phenom-
ena, not only the interaction between phonons and mag-
netism: If a contribution (X) aﬀects other contribution
(Y) and changes the free energy of Y, the thermal equi-
librium state of X is also aﬀected through the minimum
principle for the free energy.
In our study, X is mag-
netic states, and Y is phonons. Therefore, the concept of
our thermodynamic formulation can be applied to other
interacting excitations if one can express the magnitude
of the interaction as thermodynamic quantities (Emag in
our study). The formulation will be helpful for a quanti-
tative description of the ﬁnite-temperature properties of
materials.6
METHODS
First-principles phonon calculations.
All of the phonon calculations were carried out within
the harmonic approximation.
To evaluate the phonon
frequencies at an intermediate magnetic ordering, we em-
ployed a force-averaging method27. In this method, the
atomic forces at an intermediate magnetic ordering are
determined by mixing the forces at the ferromagnetic
(FM) and paramagnetic (PM) DLM states.
Following
the reference27, the atomic forces at an intermediate mag-
netic ordering can be written as
Fi ≈αFFM
i
+ (1 −α)FPM
i
,
(16)
where Fi is the atomic force vector on i-th atom and
α is a mixing parameter.
They also proposed a solid
expression of α by using the magnetic energy (Emag) as
below:
α = Emag −EPM
mag
EFM
mag −EPM
mag
,
(17)
where EPM
mag (EFM
mag) is the magnetic energy at high (low)
temperature limit in the Heisenberg model. In the orig-
inal paper27, they assumed the temperature dependence
of Emag is determined by the Monte Carlo results only.
Therefore, α was treated as a function of temperature
(α = α( eT)). This is equivalent to that the equilibrium
magnetic energy at a temperature is determined to min-
imise the magnetic free energy, not total free energy. On
the other hand, in our study, α is not regarded as a func-
tion of temperature but is interpreted as a function of
energy (α = α(E)). This interpretation allows that the
phonon free energy Gph can be regarded as a function
of the magnetic energy (Gph = Gph(T, Emag)). The tem-
perature dependence of Emag is determined after the min-
imisation of the total free energy in equation (12). This
interpretation is the most important key for solving the
minimisation problem in the minimum principle for the
free energy.
The paramagnetic DLM state in the phonon calcula-
tions was mimicked by a special quasirandom structure36
on the spin conﬁguration (up and down) as obtained from
the ATAT package37. The atomic forces were calculated
by the direct method24,38. We used the 3×3×3 cubic su-
percell (54 atoms) for the force calculations in both fer-
romagnetic and paramagnetic conditions. The employed
lattice constant a = 2.86 ˚A was derived by combining
the relaxed lattice constant and experimental lattice ex-
pansion ratio at T = 1043 K39. Although such determi-
nation procedure of lattice constant probably gives some
pressure even in the framework of the quasiharmonic ap-
proximation, we assume its eﬀect is minor and ﬁxed the
volume. First-principles calculations were based on den-
sity functional theory within the projector augmented
wave method40, as implemented in the VASP code41,42.
For the exchange-correlation functional, the generalised
gradient approximation parametrised by Perdew, Burke
and Ernzerhof43 was used. The cutoﬀenergy 400 eV and
9×9×9 k-point grid for the supercell were used for the
force calculations. The derivation of force constants and
the calculations of the phonon free energy were performed
by using the ALAMODE code44.
Calculations of exchange coupling constants.
Exchange coupling constants Jij in the Monte Carlo
simulations were derived with magnetic force theorem4
and the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) Green’s func-
tion method along with the coherent potential ap-
proximation (CPA)45,46, implemented in the AkaiKKR
code46,47.
The exchange-correlation functional was
treated within the local density approximation48. The
lattice constant was set to be the same one as in the
phonon calculations. Paramagnetic DLM state3,32 was
employed as a reference magnetic state in the derivation
of Jij. Calculated Jij values are listed in Table I.
Monte Carlo simulations.
To evaluate the magnetic entropy as a function of the
magnetic energy, we carried out the classical Monte Carlo
simulations based on the Heisenberg model
H = −2
X
(i,j)
Jijei · ej,
(18)
where Jij denotes the exchange coupling constant and
ei is the unit vector on site i. We included up to the
third nearest neighbour pairs as interacting shells. The
classical Monte Carlo simulations were performed by us-
ing the ALPS code49. To obtain more accurate results,
we employed the rescaled Monte Carlo method31 which
reproduces the quantum speciﬁc heat from the classical
speciﬁc heat.
The magnetic energy and entropy were
derived by integrating the speciﬁc heat. The spin quan-
tum number S = 1.07 for the DLM condition as cal-
culated by KKR-CPA was used in the rescaled Monte
Carlo method. The Monte Carlo simulations were car-
ried out using a 16×16×16 sites and involve 300,000 steps
for equilibration and 2,700,000 steps for averaging. Tem-
perature grids of 0.1 and 0.2 mRy were used in the range
TABLE I. Calculated exchange coupling constants Jij of bcc
Fe for the paramagnetic DLM state.
nearest neighbour
Jij (meV)
First
27.18
Second
2.62
Third
1.33
Fourth
0.21
Fifth
−1.377
of near TC and other ranges, respectively. Note that the
entropy in the rescaled Monte Carlo method does not go
to zero at T →0. Thus this method is not suitable to
describe thermodynamic quantities at a low-temperature
range. Our thermodynamic formulation, however, needs
only the result at a temperature range around TC. Thus
the shortcoming does not matter in this study.
Author contributions
The formulation was established by T.T and Y.G. All
of the calculations were conducted by T.T. The project
was supervised by Y.G. All authors discussed the results
and contributed to writing the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by MEXT as Fugaku
project and the Elements Strategy Initiative Project as
well as KAKENHI Grant No. 17K04978. We are grate-
ful to H. Akai for oﬀering the unreleased version of the
AkaiKKR code.
The calculations were partly carried
out by using supercomputers at ISSP, The University of
Tokyo, and TSUBAME, Tokyo Institute of Technology as
well as the K computer, RIKEN (Project No. hp190169).
∗tanaka.t.bj@m.titech.ac.jp
† gohda.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp
1 Spaldin, N. A. Magnetic Materials: Fundamentals and Ap-
plications (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010).
2 Coey, J. M. D. Magnetism and magnetic materials (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010).
3 Oguchi, T., Terakura, K. & Hamada, N. Magnetism of
iron above the Curie temperature. J. Phys. F: Met. Phys.
13, 145–160 (1983).
4 Liechtenstein, A. I., Katsnelson, M. I., Antropov, V. P. &
Gubanov, V. A. Local spin density functional approach to
the theory of exchange interactions in ferromagnetic metals
and alloys. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 67, 65–74 (1987).
5 Halilov, S. V., Perlov, A. Y., Oppeneer, P. M. & Eschrig, H.
Magnon spectrum and related ﬁnite-temperature magnetic
properties: A ﬁrst-principle approach. EPL 39, 91 (1997).
6 Halilov, S. V., Eschrig, H., Perlov, A. Y. & Oppeneer, P. M.
Adiabatic spin dynamics from spin-density-functional the-
ory: Application to Fe, Co, and Ni.
Phys. Rev. B 58,
293–302 (1998).
7 Sakuma, A. First Principles Study on the Exchange Con-
stants of the 3d Transition Metals. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 68,
620–624 (1999).
8 Pajda, M., Kudrnovsk´y, J., Turek, I., Drchal, V. & Bruno,
P.
Ab initio calculations of exchange interactions, spin-
wave stiﬀness constants, and Curie temperatures of Fe,
Co, and Ni. Phys. Rev. B 64, 174402 (2001).
9 Takahashi, C., Ogura, M. & Akai, H. First-principles cal-
culation of the Curie temperature Slater–Pauling curve. J.
Phys.: Condens. Matter 19, 365233 (2007).
10 Matyunina, M., Zagrebin, M., Sokolovskiy, V. & Buchel-
nikov, V. Ab initio study of magnetic and structural prop-
erties of Fe-Ga alloys. EPJ Web Conf. 185, 04013 (2018).
11 Bergqvist, L. & Bergman, A. Realistic ﬁnite temperature
simulations of magnetic systems using quantum statistics.
Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 013802 (2018).
12 Sabiryanov, R. F. & Jaswal, S. S. Ab Initio Calculations
of the Curie Temperature of Complex Permanent-Magnet
Materials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 155–158 (1997).
13 Kashyap, A., Skomski, R., Sabiryanov, R., Jaswal, S. &
Sellmyer, D. Exchange interactions and Curie temperature
of Y-Co compounds. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 39,
2908–2910 (2003).
14 Turek, I., Rusz, J. & Diviˇs, M. Electronic structure and
volume magnetostriction of rare-earth metals and com-
pounds. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 290-291, 357–363 (2005).
15 Khmelevskyi, S., Khmelevska, T., Ruban, A. V. & Mohn,
P.
Magnetic exchange interactions in the paramagnetic
state of hcp Gd. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19, 326218
(2007).
16 Toga, Y. et al. Monte Carlo analysis for ﬁnite-temperature
magnetism of Nd2Fe14B permanent magnet. Phys. Rev. B
94, 174433 (2016).
17 Gong, Q., Yi, M., Evans, R. F. L., Xu, B.-X. & Gut-
ﬂeisch, O. Calculating temperature-dependent properties
of Nd2Fe14B permanent magnets by atomistic spin model
simulations. Phys. Rev. B 99, 214409 (2019).
18 Sabiryanov, R. F. & Jaswal, S. S. Magnons and Magnon-
Phonon Interactions in Iron. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2062–
2064 (1999).
19 Yin, J., Eisenbach, M., Nicholson, D. M. & Rusanu, A.
Eﬀect of lattice vibrations on magnetic phase transition in
bcc iron. Phys. Rev. B 86, 214423 (2012).
20 Ruban, A. V. & Peil, O. E.
Impact of thermal atomic
displacements on the Curie temperature of 3d transition
metals. Phys. Rev. B 97, 174426 (2018).
21 Neuhaus, J., Petry, W. & Krimmel, A. Phonon softening
and martensitic transformation in -Fe. Physica B 234-236,
897–899 (1997).
22 Mauger, L. et al. Nonharmonic phonons in α-iron at high
temperatures. Phys. Rev. B 90, 064303 (2014).
23 Yang, F. C. et al. Temperature dependence of phonons in
Pd3Fe through the Curie temperature. Phys. Rev. B 98,
024301 (2018).
24 K¨ormann, F., Dick, A., Grabowski, B., Hickel, T. & Neuge-
bauer, J. Atomic forces at ﬁnite magnetic temperatures:
Phonons in paramagnetic iron. Phys. Rev. B 85, 125104
(2012).
25 Leonov, I., Poteryaev, A. I., Anisimov, V. I. & Vollhardt,
D. Calculated phonon spectra of paramagnetic iron at the
α-γ phase transition. Phys. Rev. B 85, 020401 (2012).
26 Leonov, I. et al.
Electronic correlations determine the
phase stability of iron up to the melting temperature. Sci.
Rep. 4, 1–4 (2014).
27 K¨ormann, F. et al.
Temperature Dependent Magnon-
Phonon Coupling in bcc Fe from Theory and Experiment.8
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 165503 (2014).
28 Han, Q., Birol, T. & Haule, K.
Phonon Softening due
to Melting of the Ferromagnetic Order in Elemental Iron.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 187203 (2018).
29 Heine, M., Hellman, O. & Broido, D. Eﬀect of thermal
lattice and magnetic disorder on phonons in bcc Fe: A
ﬁrst-principles study. Phys. Rev. B 100, 104304 (2019).
30 Dutta, B. et al. Phonons in magnetically disordered ma-
terials: Magnetic versus phononic time scales. Phys. Rev.
B 101, 094201 (2020).
31 K¨ormann, F., Dick, A., Hickel, T. & Neugebauer, J.
Rescaled Monte Carlo approach for magnetic systems: Ab
initio thermodynamics of bcc iron.
Phys. Rev. B 81,
134425 (2010).
32 Gyorﬀy, B. L., Pindor, A. J., Staunton, J., Stocks, G. M.
& Winter, H.
A ﬁrst-principles theory of ferromagnetic
phase transitions in metals. J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. 15,
1337–1386 (1985).
33 Chana, K. S., Samson, J. H., Luchini, M. U. & Heine, V.
Magnetic short-range order in iron above Tc? Statistical
mechanics with many-atom interactions. J. Phys.: Con-
dens. Matter 3, 6455–6471 (1991).
34 Rosengaard, N. M. & Johansson, B. Finite-temperature
study of itinerant ferromagnetism in Fe, Co, and Ni. Phys.
Rev. B 55, 14975–14986 (1997).
35 Leˇzai´c, M., Mavropoulos, P. & Bl¨ugel, S. First-principles
prediction of high Curie temperature for ferromagnetic
bcc-Co and bcc-FeCo alloys and its relevance to tunneling
magnetoresistance. Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 082504 (2007).
36 Zunger, A., Wei, S.-H., Ferreira, L. G. & Bernard, J. E.
Special quasirandom structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 353–
356 (1990).
37 van de Walle, A. et al. Eﬃcient stochastic generation of
special quasirandom structures. Calphad 42, 13–18 (2013).
38 Ikeda, Y., Seko, A., Togo, A. & Tanaka, I.
Phonon
softening in paramagnetic bcc Fe and its relationship to
the pressure-induced phase transition. Phys. Rev. B 90,
134106 (2014).
39 Touloukian, Y. S., Kirby, R. K., Taylor, R. E. & Desai,
P. D. Thermal Expansion: Thermophysical Properties of
Matter, vol. 12 (Plenum Press, New York, 1975).
40 Bl¨ochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys.
Rev. B 50, 17953–17979 (1994).
41 Kresse, G. & Furthm¨uller, J. Eﬃcient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169–11186 (1996).
42 Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials
to the projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B
59, 1758–1775 (1999).
43 Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M.
Generalized
Gradient Approximation Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865–3868 (1996).
44 Tadano, T., Gohda, Y. & Tsuneyuki, S. Anharmonic force
constants extracted from ﬁrst-principles molecular dynam-
ics: applications to heat transfer simulations.
J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 26, 225402 (2014).
45 Shiba, H. A Reformulation of the Coherent Potential Ap-
proximation and Its Applications. Prog. Theor. Phys. 46,
77–94 (1971).
46 Akai, H. Fast Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker coherent potential
approximation and its application to FCC Ni-Fe systems.
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 1, 8045–8064 (1989).
47 http://kkr.issp.u-tokyo.ac.jp/jp/. Note that the function
to calculate exchange coupling constants is only incorpo-
rated in an unreleased version.
48 Moruzzi, V. L., Janak, J. F. & Williams, A. R.
Cal-
culated Electronic Properties of Metals (Pergamon, New
York, 1978).
49 Bauer, B. et al. The ALPS project release 2.0: open source
software for strongly correlated systems.
J. Stat. Mech.
2011, P05001 (2011).