1  Quantitative magnetic imaging at the nanometer scale by Ballistic Electron  Magnetic Microscopy  M. Hervé, S. Tricot, S. Guézo, G. Delhaye, B. Lépine, P. Schieffer and P. Turbana) Département Matériaux et Nanosciences, Institut de Physique de Rennes, UMR 6251, CNRS- Université de Rennes 1, Campus de Beaulieu, Bât 11E, 35042 Rennes cedex, France    We demonstrate quantitative ballistic electron magnetic microscopy (BEMM) imaging of  simple model Fe(001) nanostructures.
We use in situ nanostencil shadow mask resistless  patterning combined with molecular beam epitaxy deposition to prepare under ultra-high  vacuum conditions nanostructured epitaxial Fe/Au/Fe/GaAs(001) spin-valves.
In this epitaxial  system, the magnetization of the bottom Fe/GaAs(001) electrode is parallel to the [110]  direction, defining accurately the analysis direction for the BEMM experiments.
The large hot- electron magnetoresistance of the Fe/Au/Fe/GaAs(001) epitaxial spin-valve allows us to image  various stable magnetic configurations on the as-grown Fe(001) microstructures with a high  sensitivity, even for small misalignments of both magnetic electrodes.
The angular dependence  of the hot-electron magnetocurrent is used to convert magnetization maps calculated by  micromagnetic simulations into simulated BEMM images.
The calculated BEMM images and  magnetization rotation profiles show quantitative agreement with experiments and allow us to  investigate the magnetic phase diagram of these model Fe(001) microstructures.
Finally,  magnetic domain reversals are observed under high current density pulses.
This opens the way  for further BEMM investigations of current-induced magnetization dynamics.    a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Electronic mail: pascal.turban@univ- rennes1.fr2  I. INTRODUCTION  Understanding the magnetic properties of low-dimensional systems is one major issue for the  future development of magneto-electronics devices with high areal density.
At low scale, the  presence of magnetic domains plays a crucial role on the magnetic response of small ferromagnetic  elements1.
Recent development of magnetic microscopy tools for the analysis of bulk materials as  well as thin films, surfaces, interfaces and nanostructures2 has allowed a direct comparison of  micro- and nano-magnetic models with experiments, down to the nano-scale.
Among magnetic  microscopies presenting high lateral resolution, the recently proposed Ballistic Electron Magnetic  Microscopy (BEMM)3,4 appears promising due to some of its specific features.
In BEMM, a  scanning tunneling microscope (STM) non-magnetic tip is used to locally inject a hot electron  current in a spin-valve grown on a semiconducting substrate.
The ballistic current IC collected in the  semiconductor is modulated by the hot-electron giant magneto-resistance (GMR) effect, allowing  magnetic imaging of the spin-valve domain structure.
BEMM is thus sensitive to the volume  magnetism of thin films and nanostructures, and can be used to image the magnetic domain  structure of buried ultrathin elements integrated in realistic magneto-resistive devices.
Although a  measurement of the ultimate BEMM magnetic resolution is still missing, an upper bound of 28nm  was reported on p-doped samples5, while a lateral resolution below 1nm was reported in ballistic  electron emission microscopy experiments on non-magnetic samples6.
Up to now, BEMM was  quasi exclusively used to investigate magnetic domain structure or magnetization reversal process  in planar spin-valves only.
Most of these studies were limited to a qualitative analysis of the parallel  and anti-parallel magnetic domain evolution under applied field, and only recently BEMM  quantitative analysis of magnetic domain walls profiles was reported7,8.
Despite the BEMM high  lateral resolution, only one study was dedicated to the investigation of FeNi patterned magneticnanostructures4.
This is most likely due to the fact that classical UV or electron lithography is  hardly compatible with the preservation of a post-process surface cleanliness allowing stable  STM/BEMM imaging conditions.
In this paper, we report on BEMM investigation of ultrathin  epitaxial Fe(001) microstructures integrated in epitaxial Fe/Au/Fe/GaAs(001) spin-valves.
We use  in situ shadow mask deposition to pattern elongated magnetic elements in the top Fe(001) spin- valve electrode.
Competition between shape anisotropy, magneto-crystalline anisotropy and  exchange energy terms results in the formation of various magnetic domain structures on the as- grown sample.
These various magnetic configurations are reproduced by micromagnetic  calculations.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the calculated magnetization maps can be converted  into simulated BEMM images.
An excellent agreement is obtained between simulated and  measured BEMM images demonstrating the BEMM ability for quantitative magnetic imaging of  micro/nanostructures.
Finally, we report observation of magnetic domain wall motion under high  injected current pulses.
This suggests that BEMM can also be used as a powerful experimental tool  for the investigation of current-induced magnetization dynamics in micro/nanostructures. II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Samples are prepared by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
A 1.5μm thick Si n-doped (41016cm- 3) GaAs buffer layer is first grown in a independent MBE chamber on a n+-GaAs(001) substrate and  protected by a 5μm thick amorphous As capping layer to allow transfer under ambient atmosphere  in the BEMM setup.
The ultra-high vacuum (UHV) BEMM setup9, with a base pressure better than  1×10-10mbar, consists of a metal MBE deposition chamber connected to the STM/BEMM  microscope.
Thermal desorption of the As protecting layer is first done at 760K, in front of a  cryopanel cooled with liquid nitrogen, leading to the formation of a clean As(24)-reconstructed  34  GaAs(001).
After sample cooling down to room temperature, MBE deposition of the  Fe(1nm)/Au(6nm)/Fe(1.2nm)/GaAs(001) spin-valve on the GaAs surface is performed by using two  Knudsen cells.
Two levels of shadow-mask microstructuration are used during the spin-valve  deposition process.
The bottom Fe electrode and the non-magnetic Au spacing layer are first  deposited through a shadow mask to form 400μm diameter metallic dots on the GaAs(001)  substrate.
This allows us to obtain highly resistive Au/Fe/GaAs(001) Schottky contacts (R>10MΩ  at room temperature) for low-noise BEMM measurement.
The top Fe electrode of the spin-valve is  finally patterned in an array of 1700*550nm2 capsule-shaped elements via the nanostencil  technique10,11.
The mask, a 900 nm thick silicon nitride membrane structured by focused ion beam,  is gently brought into direct contact with the GaAs substrate, and deposition is performed with  normal incidence to minimize blurring of the structure edges.
In the following, all crystalline  directions will refer to crystal directions of the GaAs(001) substrate.
The long axis of the Fe  microstructure was aligned along [1-10].
Electrochemically etched W STM tips are cleaned in situ  by thermal heating before the BEMM experiments.
The hot-electron current IC is collected at the  back of the GaAs substrate using an indium ohmic contact.
A gold wire mounted on a translation  motion and a gimbal tilter is used to ground selectively the surface of the 400μm diameter isolated  metallic dots12 in the STM/BEMM microscope head.
All STM/BEMM experiments are performed  at room-temperature in the constant-current mode of operation, without applying any magnetic field  on the as grown spin-valve.
Micromagnetic simulations are performed using the freely available  OOMMF package13 (Object Oriented MicroMagnetic Framework).
The Gilbert gyromagnetic ratio  is set to 2.2x105 m/A/s and the damping constant is kept large (α=0.5) to ensure fast simulation  convergence.
The magnetic volume is discretized using a 2.5x2.5x1 nm3 cell.
The Fe stiffness  constant is set to 1.13x10-11 J/m14 and the saturation magnetization to 1720 kA/m. A slight uniaxialanisotropy energy contribution (with a [110] easy axis) is introduced as well as a biaxial anisotropy  energy term ([100] and [010] easy axes) with respective magneto-crystalline anisotropy constants  Ku=2.73 kJ/m3 and K1=8kJ/m3, as measured by magneto-optical Kerr effect on identical  unpatterned Fe film.
The resulting magnetic anisotropy defines two easy axes, respectively 30° and  150° away from the [110] direction for an unpatterned planar top Fe electrode.
No magnetic  coupling was considered vertically between both Fe(001) electrodes of the spin-valve due to the  large Au spacer thickness nor laterally between neighboring dots. III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION      FIG.
1. Surface morphology at each step of the spin-valve deposition : (a) 100*55nm2 STM image  of the GaAs(001) surface after desorption of the protective amorphous As cap.
(b) 100*55nm2 STM  image after deposition of the 1.2nm thick Fe(001) bottom electrode.
(c) 30*16nm2 STM image of  the 6nm thick Au(001) spacing layer.
(d) epitaxial relationship of the Fe/Au/Fe/GaAs(001) stack.
56  Fig. 1 displays STM images recorded at each step of an unpatterned epitaxial  Fe(1nm)/Au(6nm)/Fe(1.2nm)/GaAs(001) spin-valve deposited at room temperature.
After the As  capping layer thermal desorption, the GaAs(001) initial surface is As-rich, and presents a disordered  As(2*4) surface reconstruction, with As dimer lines running along the [1-10] GaAs crystal direction  (Fig. 1(a)).
The obtained GaAs surface is atomically flat over large areas, with a typical atomic  terraces size of 400nm.
After deposition of the 1.2nm thick Fe bottom electrode, a surface granular  structure is observed (Fig. 1(b)).
The surface is made of few nanometer wide atomically flat Fe 3D  islands which appear slightly elongated along the [1-10] crystal direction.
Despite the small size of  these Fe terraces, the resulting peak-to-peak roughness is limited to 0.4nm over 400*400nm2 areas.
Deposition of the 6nm thick Au spacer leads to a significant smoothing of the sample surface (Fig.  1(c)), with Au atomic terraces expanding over 30nm and presenting a (2*2) surface reconstruction.
This surface reconstruction is due to the segregation of roughly half a monolayer of As as  confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy experiments.
As is well known to segregate from  the GaAs surface during the Fe layer deposition15 and is further floating on the surface during the  Au spacer deposition.
Finally, the top 1nm thick Fe electrode presents a surface morphology similar  to  the  first  electrode.
The  obtained  epitaxial  relationship  in  the  stack  is  Fe[100]//Au[110]//Fe[100]//GaAs[100] (Fig. 1(d)).
Fig. 2(a) displays a typical 1.4*1.4μm2 large scale STM image of the final spin-valve, with the  top Fe electrode patterned by the nanostencil technique.
Atomic steps of the GaAs(001) substrate  are observed after the spin-valve deposition.
One Fe(001) dot (top electrode) is observed with its  long axis parallel to the [1-10] direction of the GaAs substrate.
The measured height of the Fe dot is  1.0±0.1nm in agreement with its targeted thickness.
A line profile over the Fe(001) dot edges shows  an edge broadening with a width of 50nm, typical of the nanostencil technique.
Fig. 2(b) presentsthe BEMM image recorded simultaneously with the STM image.
This image corresponds to a (80  pixels*80 pixels) grid of the hot electron current IC recorded over the (400 pixels*400 pixels) STM  image.
Tunnel current was set to 20nA and hot-electron energy to 2.1eV in order to improve the  signal-to-noise ratio.
The magnetization of the bottom Fe electrode is parallel to the [110] direction  of the substrate due to the strong uniaxial magnetic anisotropy at the Fe/GaAs(001) interface16,  defining the analyzer direction for the BEMM experiments. FIG.
2. (a) Left : 1.4*1.4μm2 STM image of the Fe(1nm)/Au(6nm)/Fe(1.2nm)/GaAs(001) spin- valve.
The 1700*550nm2 capsule-shaped top Fe(001) electrode has its long axis parallel to the [1- 10] direction of the GaAs substrate.
(b) Right: corresponding BEMM image (color scale: 6 to  157pA).
Tunneling current was set to 20nA and electron energy to 2.1eV. Black arrow indicates the  orientation of the Fe bottom electrode (BEMM analyzer), parallel to [110].
7 On the BEMM image, a sequence of dark (low ballistic current) and bright (high ballistic  current) areas are observed along the top Fe dot long axis, without any correlation with the surface  morphology.
This contrast is from magnetic origin and attributed to the presence of four magnetic  domains in the microstructure.
The corresponding magneto-current (MC) at 2.1eV between darkand bright BEMM areas (defined as  (dark) I (dark) I (bright) I C C C  ) is of 115%.
This value is smaller than  the MC amplitude measured on an identical unpatterned planar spin-valve (MC180°=260% of  relative change of the BEMM current at 2.1eV, between a strictly parallel and strictly anti-parallel  magnetic configuration of both Fe electrodes), suggesting that the magnetization rotation angle  between dark and bright regions of Fig. 2(b) is smaller than 180°.
A halo of higher BEMM current  is also observed all around the Fe(001) dot.
The width of this brighter area is of typically 80nm and  is thus related to the Fe wedge at the borders of the microstructure.
This wedge causes an increase  of the hot-electron intensity due to the reduced Fe thickness crossed by the hot-electron beam.
The  magneto-crystalline anisotropy of the Fe(001) layer, and thus the magnetization orientation close to  the borders, is also modified when the film thickness decreases from 1 to 0 nm.
A part of the halo  can thereby also have a magnetic origin, but a clear description of this specific part of the BEMM  image is beyond the scope of this paper.
In the following, abrupt edges of the microstructure are  considered for micromagnetic simulations.
Fig. 3(a) presents the calculated stable micromagnetic configuration obtained for the Fe(001)  capsule.
Before calculation, the dot was arbitrarily initialized in a 4 magnetic domains configuration  whith the magnetization lying along the easy axis of the unpatterned top electrode.
The simulation  stabilizes 94° Néel walls and the magnetization in the dot is 43° (respectively 137°) away from the  [110] analyzer direction for the bright (respectively dark) domains.
This is a consequence of the  introduction of supplementary shape anisotropy by the patterning process: both easy axes of the  system rotate by 13° in direction of the long axis of the microstructure.
For a quantitative  comparison of the micromagnetic simulation with BEMM experiments, we used the magnetization  map of Fig. 3(a) as an input to simulate a BEMM image.
The hot-electron current depends on the  8angle θ between the local magnetization of the Fe dot and analyzer direction with a        2 θ sin2  law17.
We could thus compute the BEMM current at each cell of the OOMMF simulation by considering  the angle θ between local magnetization direction in the Fe dot and the reference [110] direction of  the Fe bottom electrode.
The obtained simulated BEMM image (Fig. 3(b)) is nicely matching the  experimental BEMM image of Fig. 2(b).
An experimental BEMM current profile IC(x,y) across the  94° Néel wall was also extracted from Fig. 2(b) (dotted green arrow), and converted into an angular  profile θ(x,y).
A quantitative agreement (Fig. 3(c)) is obtained with the micromagnetic simulation,  without using any free parameter nor introducing any experimental broadening.
The measured  width of the 94° domain wall is of 130nm.    FIG. 3.
Quantitative analysis of the experimental BEMM image from Fig. 2(b): (a) micromagnetic  calculation of the magnetization map in the Fe(001) dot.
(b) Corresponding calculated BEMM  9image.
(c) Experiment/simulation comparison: plot of a measured BEMM current profile across a  magnetic domain wall (black continuous line); this profile was extracted along the green dotted  arrow of Fig. 2(b) and converted in an experimental magnetization angle profile (purple empty  circles).
Continuous purple line corresponds to the simulated magnetization angle profile obtained  by micromagnetic calculation.
Magnetization rotates by 94° across the 130nm wide domain wall.      FIG.
4. 1.4*1.4μm2 BEMM images of the 4 only magnetic configurations observed after sampling  30 as-grown Fe(001) dots, presenting 1 (a), 2 (b), 3 (c) or 4 (d) magnetic domains.
1011  30 other identical Fe(001) dots were probed over the sample surface.
Only four kind of  magnetic configurations were observed by BEMM, presenting 1, 2, 3 or 4 magnetic domains, as  reported on Fig. 4(a)-4(d).
All the bright (respectively dark) domains present the same IC values as  the dark/bright areas of Fig. 2(b), and correspond once more to magnetization orientation 43°  (respectively 137°) away from the [110] analyzer direction.
For all observed configurations, the  number and position of magnetic domain walls in the microstructure do not show any obvious  correlation with the underlying GaAs substrate atomic steps.
The domain walls also do not present  any important bowing.
We thus don’t have experimental evidence of domain wall pining by  structural defects and consider that the observed magnetic configurations are among the lowest- energy configurations of the magnetic phase diagram.
To check this point, we reproduced the  observed configurations by micromagnetic calculations.
The microstructure was arbitrarily  initialized in a configuration with 1, 2, 3 or 4 magnetic domain with magnetization parallel to the  easy axis of the Fe unpatterned top electrode.
Except for the single domain case, calculations  stabilized multi-domains structures separated by 94° domain walls.
The final positions of the  domain walls in the stable calculated magnetic configurations are in good agreement with the  BEMM images of Fig. 4(a)-4(d).
The corresponding total magnetic energies are plotted in Fig. 5.
The 4 configurations which are experimentally observed by BEMM correspond to the lowest  calculated magnetic energies and the absolute minimum magnetic energy is obtained for the two  domains structure.
The energy difference between the 1, 2 and 3-domains states is weak (0.03kJ/m3  corresponding to 158meV for one dot) and accounts for the majority presence of these  configurations on the as-grown sample.
The 4-domains configuration was observed only once over  30 sampled dots, which is coherent with its significantly higher energy (551meV higher than the 2- domains state).FIG. 5.
Plot of the total magnetic energy calculated by micromagnetic simulations for magnetic  states of the Fe(001) dot with 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 magnetic domain walls.
The 4 lowest energy states  correspond to the magnetic configurations experimentally observed in Fig. 4.      FIG.
6. 1.4*1.4μm2 BEMM images of Fe(001) dots.
Scan direction is from left to right and bottom  to top.
STM tip instabilities were observed while scanning and generated high current density  pulses (typically in the 100-200nA range).
These events are marked by black arrows and cause  magnetization switching between the two easy axis of the Fe(001) dot as evidenced by BEMM  contrast inversion.
1213    Finally, some unexpected events were observed during the acquisition of the BEMM images.
Due to the high tunnelling current values (IT=20nA) and tunnel bias used in the BEMM  experiments, STM tip instabilities are common while scanning (mostly due to material exchange  between tip and surface).
These instabilities are accompanied by local injection of intense tunnel  current pulses (up to 200nA) in the spin valve.
We noticed that when these current pulses were  located inside the Fe dots, a sudden change in the BEMM signal (marked by arrows on Fig. 6(a)- 6(b)) was observed inside the magnetic microsctructure, without any signal change outside the dot.
We checked that similar current pulses generated outside the Fe dots did not lead to any similar  contrast changes.
This contrast change is thus from magnetic origin and related to current-induced  magnetic domain reversal.
Various driving-forces can lead to current induced magnetic switching.
In our experiments, the Oersted field locally generated during current injection can be estimated  typically of the order of few ten of μT, i.e. of the same order of magnitude than earth magnetic  field.
The influence of this Oersted field alone is thus questionable.
Local Joule heating of the  sample can promote domain wall motion, when supplementary thermal energy allows detrapping of  the domain wall from structural defects.
Recent spin-polarized experiments18 demonstrated that the  Joule heating of a nanometric Fe/W(110) monoatomic island induced by electron tunnelling at 40K  led to a typical effective temperature increase of 17K/μW for a typical 4*4nm2 island.
This would  correspond in our experiments to an estimated upper bound for the local temperature increase under  the STM tip of 1K considering a 10*10nm2 heat dissipation area.
This temperature increase is low  compared to the thermal energy at room temperature.
Since we don’t observe any thermal  fluctuation of the magnetic configuration with a stable tip, the influence of the local Joule heating  alone can be excluded.
Finally, spin-transfer torque effect can promote magnetization rotation14  induced by current pulses in such spin-valve structure19.
The current pulse during the tip instability  can potentially achieve a current density up to 1011 A.m-2 (considering a 100nA pulse over a  1*1nm2 injection area) which is sufficient for spin-transfer torque observation.
However, when the  electron beam is flowing from the free magnetic layer (microstructure) to the fixed magnetic layer  (bottom Fe electrode) the spin transfer torque effect should promote a switching towards the anti- parallel magnetic state of the spin-valve.
As can be seen on Fig. 6(b) , we observe both kinds of  magnetic contrast inversions, either from the parallel to the anti-parallel state or vice versa.
From  this very preliminary analysis, we can thus not clearly attribute a unique and simple origin to the  observed magnetization switching phenomenon.
A more complex combination of thermal, Oersted  field and spin-transfer torque effects may account for our observations, but further detailed  experimental investigations combined with micromagnetic simulations is necessary to conclude on  this point.
However, these primary observations demonstrate the potential interest of BEMM for the  investigation of current-induced magnetization dynamics. IV.
CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, we observe by ballistic electron magnetic microscopy the magnetic domain  structure of epitaxial Fe(001) sub-micron elements integrated in epitaxial Fe/Au/Fe/GaAs(001) spin  valve.
We take advantage of the high uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of the bottom Fe/GaAs(001)  electrode to quantitatively analyze the magnetization orientation of the unknown Fe magnetic  microstructure with respect to the [110] direction.
The large magneto-contrast between parallel and  anti-parallel states of the spin-valve gives access to a large dynamical range of BEMM current for a  360° rotation of the magnetization.
Angular dependence of the magneto-contrast is used to convert  micromagnetic simulations into simulated BEMM images in quantitative agreement with15  experiments.
A 13° rotation of the magnetic easy axes caused by shape anisotropy in the Fe(001)  dots is determined by BEMM.
The various magnetic configurations imaged by BEMM on the as- grown sample are finally matching the lowest energy states of the magnetic phase diagram for the  system.
A further step of this BEMM study is to investigate in situ the magnetization reversal  mechanisms of the microstructure, either by applying an in-plane magnetic field on the sample, or  by using the STM tip to locally generate in a controlled manner high current density pulses.
This  work is in progress.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This work was financially supported by Région Bretagne and Rennes Métropole.
Technical  support by Arnaud Le Pottier during the BEMM setup development is gratefully acknowledged.16  REFERENCES  1 A. Hubert and R. Schäfer, Magnetic Domains (Springer, New York, 1998).
2 M.R. Freeman and B.C. Choi, Science 294, 1484 (2001).
3 W. H. Rippard and R. A. Buhrman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 1001 (1999).
4 W. H. Rippard, A. C. Perrella, P. Chalsani, F. J. Albert, J. A. Katine, and R. A. Buhrman, Appl.  Phys. Lett. 77, 1357 (2000).
5 E. Haq, T. Banerjee, M. H. Siekman, J. C. Lodder, and R. Jansen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 082502  (2005).
6 H. Sirringhaus, E. Y. Lee, and H. von Känel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3999 (1995).
7 A. Kaidatzis, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, and J. Miltat, Phys.
Rev. B 78, 174426 (2008).
8 A. Bellec, S. Rohart, M. Labrune, J. Miltat, and A. Thiaville, Europhys. Lett. 91, 17009 (2010).
9 S. Guézo, P. Turban, S. Di Matteo, P. Schieffer, S. Le Gall, B. Lépine, C. Lallaizon, and G.  Jézéquel, Phys.
Rev. B 81, 085319 (2010).
10 A Linklater and J. Nogami, Nanotechnology 19, 285302 (2008).
11 M. M. Deshmukh, D. C. Ralph, M. Thomas, and J. Silcox, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 1631 (1999).
12 S. Guézo, P. Turban, C. Lallaizon, J.C. Le Breton, P. Schieffer, B. Lépine, and G. Jézéquel,  Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 172116 (2008).
13 M. J. Donahue and D. G. Porter, OOMMF User’s Guide Version 1.0, NISTIR 6376 (National  Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1999).
14 K. Nakamura, T. Ito, A. J. Freeman, L. Zhong, and J. Fernandez-de-Castro, J. Appl.
Phys. 93,  6879 (2003).
15 P. Schieffer, A. Guivarc’h, C. Lallaizon, B. Lépine, D. Sébilleau, P. Turban, and G. Jézéquel  Appl. Phys.
Lett. 89, 161923 (2006).16 O. Thomas, Q. Shen, P. Schieffer, N. Tournerie, and B. Lépine, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 017205  (2003).
17 We used the following dependence:                   2 θ sin * MC 2 θ sin * I I I ) θ ( I ) θ ( I I 2 180 2 AP C AP C P C C C P C ,  E.Y.Tsymbal and D.G.Pettifor, Solid State Physics 56, 113 (2001).
18 A. Schlenhoff, S. Krause, A. Sonntag, and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. Lett.
109, 097602  (2012).
19 M. D. Stiles and J. Miltat, Spin Transfer Torque and Dynamics in Spin Dynamics in Confined  Magnetic Structures III: Topics in Applied Physics (Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, 2006) pp 225-308.    17