arXiv:1312.2609v2 [cond-mat.stat-mech]  16 May 2014 1 The length and time scales of water’s glass transitions David T. Limmer1, a) Princeton Center for Theoretical Science, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540 (Dated: 21 September 2018) Using a general model for the equilibrium dynamics of supercooled liquids, I compute from molecular proper- ties the emergent length and time scales that govern the nonequilibrium relaxation behavior of amorphous ice prepared by rapid cooling.
Upon cooling, the liquid water falls out of equilibrium whereby the temperature dependence of its relaxation time is predicted to change from super-Arrhenius to Arrhenius.
A consequence of this crossover is that the location of the apparent glass transition temperature depends logarithmically on cooling rate.
Accompanying vitriﬁcation is the emergence of a dynamical length-scale, the size of which depends on the cooling rate and varies between angstroms and 10s of nanometers.
While this protocol depen- dence clariﬁes a number of previous experimental observations for amorphous ice, the arguments are general and can be extended to other glass forming liquids.
Glasses of water, or amorphous ices, are nonequilib- rium, nonergodic states of matter and as such their prop- erties depend intimately on how they are prepared.1 As with other substances, glassy phases of water can be pre- pared by cooling the liquid, however due to the ease at which water crystallizes cooling rates required to vit- rify water are much larger than those typically employed in other glassy-forming materials.2 Understanding how large cooling rates aﬀect the properties of amorphous ice is of considerable interest because experimentally water must be cooled at rates greater than 108 K/min, which is up to 8 orders of magnitude greater then those rates utilized when crystallization can be suppressed, such as in aqueous solutions and conﬁned water.3–6 Recently it has been shown that the reversible relaxation kinetics of supercooled water are well described by dynamic facilita- tion theory.7,8 By adopting recent extensions of this the- ory to systems arrested by cooling,9 the emergent length and time scales that result when liquid water is driven out-of-equilibrium can be computed.
With these scales, the location of the water’s glass transition temperature is shown to depend logarithmically on cooling rate, which is proposed to explain the broad range of previous exper- imental estimates.4,6,10,11 Dynamic facilitation theory posits that below an on- set temperature, To, reorganization in a supercooled ﬂuid is the result of localized excitations that exhibit no static correlations in equilibrium, but whose dynam- ics are highly correlated.12 At low temperatures where mobility is sparse, T < To, the concentration of these excitations, c, is proportional to the Boltzmann factor, c ∝exp [−(1/T −1/To)Jσ] , (1) where Jσ is the free energy for creating an excitation in the liquid with surrounding displacement σ.
The mo- tion of these excitations through the ﬂuid is constrained, such that mobility is more likely to occur near regions that are already mobile and the direction of that mo- bility is preserved over a length scale greater than the a)Electronic mail: dlimmer@princeton.edu size of the excitation.
These kinetic constraints mani- fest themselves in dynamic heterogeneity, stretched ex- ponential decay of time correlation functions and trans- port decoupling.13 The dynamics that result from these constraints are hierarchical,14 with a logarithmic energy scaling relation for excitations accompanying diﬀerent displacement lengths, Ja′ −Ja = γJσ ln a′/a , (2) where γ is a non-universal exponent of order unity that relates the likelihood of two excitations of diﬀerent sizes meeting.
The constituent relations in Eqs. 1 and 2 come from solvable lattice models such as the East15 and Arrow models,16 but these basic behaviors also emerge in molec- ular dynamics simulations.17 By coarse-graining short trajectories, in eﬀect mapping molecular dynamics to these lattice models, the microscopic material proper- ties To, Jσ and γ can be determined.
For water and water-like models at ambient pressure, these properties obey a principle of corresponding states such that the onset temperature is approximately given by the temper- ature of maximum density, experimentally correspond- ing to To ≈277 K, while in units of this temperature, Jσ/To = 23 and γ = 0.63.7 This microscopic procedure has so far only been applied to a few systems,7,17 how- ever the macroscopic consequences of adopting this per- spective have been more systematically studied.
Among other things, the existence of localized excitations obey- ing these speciﬁed propagation rules determines the tem- perature dependence of the mean structural relaxation time.
This form, known as the parabolic law, has been used to collapse experimental data on a wide variety of structural glass formers,18,19 including molecular dynam- ics models of water7 and nanoconﬁned water20 where complications to crystallization can be mitigated.
Below To, the temperature dependence of the mean structural relaxation time is, ln τ(T )/τMF = (1/T −1/To) Jσ ln[ℓ(T )/σ]γ , (3) where at equilibrium the length ℓ(T ) is given by, ℓ(T )/σ = e(1/T −1/To)Jσ/df .
(4)2 This length is simply the mean free path between uncor- related excitations, whose concentration is determined by the Boltzmann factor in Eq. 1, and df is the fractal di- mensionality of these paths, which has been determined numerically for three spatial dimensions to be df = 2.6.17 Substituting Eq. 4 into Eq. 3 gives the more familiar form of the parabolic law.
Below To, the super-Arrhenius tem- perature dependence observed for supercooled liquids can be seen as a consequence of the temperature dependence of this length that increases exponentially with decreas- ing temperature following the decreasing number density of excitations.
The proportionality constant τMF in Eq. 3 is the average time for attempting displacements above To.
While this time may have a temperature dependence itself, it is typically weak and for simplicity is assumed to be a constant, τMF ≈2.5 × 10−12 s.20 In order to extend this picture to irreversible relax- ation, the protocol that drives the system out of equilib- rium must be deﬁned.
In this work, only protocols that begin with the system in equilibrium and are cooled at constant rate with magnitude, ν = |∆T/∆t|, to a tem- perature far below the glass transition are considered.
The condition of beginning in equilibrium is critical, as it allows for the application of the theory for the reversible dynamics described above.
The constant cooling rate and quench depth are chosen here for simplicity and can be re- laxed to accommodate behaviors associated with anneal- ing and aging.
Accordingly, only the mean relaxation, or aging time, within the amorphous ice immediately follow- ing the cooling protocol is considered.
Its temperature dependence therefore implies the timescale for relaxation upon reheating the quenched material.
Under a constant cooling rate, the condition for main- taining an equilibrium state is that the rate of change of the external temperature is slow relative to the cor- responding change in the relaxation time of the system.
This condition, or rather where it breaks down, deﬁnes the glass transition temperature, Tg, where the system falls out-of-equilibrium.
The identiﬁcation of a single temperature is well deﬁned only in-so-far as relaxation occurs in stages with well separated timescales.
For the hierarchical dynamics considered here, this is exactly what happens.
Speciﬁcally, as has been pointed out pre- viously by Solich and Evans for the East model,21 in the limit of vanishing concentration of excitations, relaxation of diﬀerent domains occur in stages separated by O[ℓ(T )].
Therefore, on a timescale less than τ(Tg), only domains less than ℓ(Tg) are likely to relax, leaving excitations sep- arated by distances greater than this length arrested for T < Tg and times less than τ(Tg).
Given this time scale separation for the model dynam- ics considered here, Tg can be deﬁned implicitly by the diﬀerential relationship, dτ dT  Tg = ν−1 .
(5) Assuming that Tg is on the order of To, Eq. 5 can be evaluated and substituted into Eq. 4 to give the mean FIG.
1. Mean structural relaxation time, predicted for wa- ter as a function of temperature for diﬀerent cooling rates: 1 K/min (black), 104 K/min (red) and 107 K/min (blue). Following Eq. 5.
the location of the crossover to Arrhenius temperature dependence of τ indicates the glass transition temperature, Tg.
Following Eq. 7, locations where dashed lines increase to log τ/ps = 14 deﬁne the apparent glass tran- sition temperature, Tag as a function of cooling rate.
While only the limiting behaviors at high and low temperature are directly observable for water, the implications of these mean timescales are pronounced, as discussed in the text.
nonequilibrium distance between excitations, ℓ(T < Tg) ≈ℓne ≈σ exp hp −ln(˜ν)/γdf i , (6) where ˜ν = 2ντoJ2 σγ/dfT 3 o is a dimensionless cooling rate.
Following the arguments above, this length scale in the glassy phase is indicative of correlations generated in the material out-of-equilibrium that exist until the material is warmed.
Unlike in equilibrium where the mean dis- tance becomes increasingly large upon cooling, in the ar- rested state the length is frozen into the structure of the material and thus no longer changes appreciably with temperature.
Correspondingly, below Tg the timescale of relaxation no longer has an additional temperature de- pendence from ℓ(T ).
Therefore in the amorphous ice, the relaxation changes from the parabolic form to an Arrhe- nius form.
Figure 1 shows the predicted relaxation time as a func- tion of temperature for diﬀerent cooling rates.
As with all of the results presented in this paper, the parameters have been independently computed from microscopic cal- culations.
The reversible liquid relaxation is predicted to be a smooth, monotonically increasing function given by Eq. 3 and ℓ(T ) in Eq. 4.
The irreversible glassy re- laxation is given by Eq. 3 and ℓne in Eq. 6 with τMF determined by equating both curves at T = Tg.
These equations predict that for systems prepared by cooling rates that are slower than 1 K/min, follow the reversible curve over the timescales considered.
Cooling rates that exceed 1 K/min however, exhibit a crossover to an Ar-3 rhenius temperature dependence.
For faster rates, this crossover occurs at higher temperatures, corresponding to the system falling out of equilibrium from perturba- tions with shorter characteristic timescales.
For bulk water, fast cooling rates are required due to the rapid rate of crystallization, therefore only indirect evidence of this crossover is observable.
Nevertheless, a testable prediction of this theory follows from Eqs. 3, 4 and 6 from which the change in slope at this crossover point can be evaluated.
By construction, ℓ(Tg) = ℓne, so the change in slope of the relaxation time evaluated at Tg, is invariant to cooling rate.
Though indirect for water, this crossover is observable for other glass forming liquids and for example is illustrated in Ref.
22 complete with a change in slope of approximately 1/2 as predicted from the above equations.
While the abruptness of the crossover is a product of assuming the relaxation time is given by a single length scale, corrections to this approx- imation will certainly smooth the crossover.
However, to the extent that the distribution of lengths after the cool- ing protocol is sharply peaked around its mean value, as has been shown in Ref. 9, then for T < Tg, τ(T ) will be well determined by this mean ﬁeld approximation.
For water, while the crossover itself is not observable, both the higher temperature behavior of the liquid and the low temperature behavior of the amorphous ice can be observed and be used to verify this prediction.
The changing temperature dependence in τ(T ) is a consequence of falling out of equilibrium, arresting the liquid and forming a glass.
As such it is expected to be a general feature of supercooled liquids driven from equi- librium and thus distinct from observations of crossovers noted previously for water under nano-conﬁnement.23 Observations in conﬁned water are made from nominally equilibrium measurements in pores whose disordered sur- faces and sizes frustrate crystallization.20 The speciﬁc origin of this behavior is the subject of debate,23 how- ever previous work suggests that it is due to freezing in conﬁnement.20 The behavior detailed here is, however, related to previously inferred transitions that have been invoked to either explain the weak thermal response upon heating hyper-quenched amorphous ice24 or the variabil- ity in temperature dependence of the relaxation time at the glass transition.25 Indeed, crossovers of this sort have been previously postulated to reconcile the location of water’s Tg with ﬁts to the equilibrium liquid relaxation time,26 however in this work the crossoever is explicitly considered a nonequilubrium eﬀect, not predicted to oc- cur in the reversible behavior of liquid water.
Because of the crossover in temperature dependence of the mean relaxation time, there exists a temperature below Tg where the system will begin to relax on labo- ratory timescales.
This transition to a softening glassy state, is denoted the apparent glass transition tempera- ture, Tag.
In water this transition is often followed by abrupt crystallization, which does not allow for the com- plete recovery of the liquid.
The apparent glass tran- sition temperature is deﬁned by, τ(Tag) = 100 s, or for FIG. 2.
Apparent glass transition temperature of water upon heating, as a function of cooling rate, deﬁned in Eq. 7.
The crossover near cooling rates of 1K/min occurs as the Tag be- comes equal to Tg as deﬁned in Eq. 5.
Note that experimen- tally only ν > 107K/min result in direct vitriﬁcation of water.
ν > 1 K/min, T −1 ag = T −1 o + ln(100s/τMF)/Jσ p −ln(˜ν)γ/df , (7) otherwise Tag equals the temperature where the extrapo- lated liquid relaxation time reaches 100s, which for water is about 180 K.7 While, Eq. 7 refers explicitly to where relaxation takes place on timescales of 100s this can be generalized.8 Figure 2 plots the apparent glass transi- tion temperature which is shown to depend logarithmi- cally on cooling rate.
This dependence is irrelevant to many experiments on glass forming liquids, as cooling rates usually range between 1-10 K/min. However, for water, this dependence is crucial because cooling rates greater than 108K/min are used in order to bypass crys- tallization.
Cooling rates that are less than 1 K/min do not change Tag, as these perturbations would cause the system to fall out of equilibrium at larger characteris- tic timescales than 100s.
However, cooling rates greater than 1 K/min are expected to aﬀect the observed Tag systematically, with changes of over 50 K expected for cooling rates that vary between 10 −108K/min. Similar logarithmic cooling rate dependences has been noted ex- perimentally for other network-forming liquids,27,28 and in simulations,29 however this work seems to be the ﬁrst to derive such a dependence from microscopic proper- ties.
This distinction between Tg and Tag has been noted previously by Angell, who called this softening and its associated thermal response a “shadow glass transition,” however this work is the ﬁrst to give a quantiﬁable mech- anistic explanation.30 The logarithmic dependence of Tag for water on cool- ing rate explains the apparent contradiction between4 dielectric measurements and extrapolated calorimetry measurements.4 Dielectric measurements directly probe the timescale for molecular reorganization and designate the location of the glass transition temperature accord- ing to the deﬁnition in Eq. 7.
Accordingly, estimates for the location of the glass transition with samples cooled at rates between 107−108K/min yield values near 130-140K in agreement with the results for Tag presented here.3 Al- ternatively, calorimetry measurements probe the recov- ery of the liquid upon heating from the glass and desig- nate the temperature where the system falls out of equi- librium as the location of the glass transition, correspond- ing to the deﬁnition of Tg in Eq. 5.
While these measure- ments are not directly possible in bulk water as crystal- lization interferes, extrapolations using data for aqueous solutions11 and measurements of water in conﬁnement6 both yield values for Tg between 160-180K. While extrap- olation from bulk water behavior to water in conﬁnement or concentrated solution is not straightforward, previous work has shown that in many instances eﬀects from these perturbations result in small corrections to Jσ, To and τMF.20 Figures 1 and 2, show that it is only when cooling rates are on the order of 1 K/min are expected to yield Tg ≈Tag.
This argument against a value of Tg for water near 140 K presumes that observations of a weak thermal response for hyper-quenched or otherwise prepared amorphous ice near that temperature is not indicative of a recovering liquid state, but rather is a nonequilibrium response to impending crystallization.
The smallness of the observed heat capacity relative to the known equilibrium liquid value31 suggests that this is a reasonable perspective, nevertheless it stands as an implicit assumption to the interpretation of this theory as applied to water.
Note however that the deﬁnition of Tg employed here is where the liquid falls out of equilibrium, which in order to by- pass crystallization must occur at temperatures greater the the limit of homogeneous nucleation, 220 K.5 The nonequilibrium length deﬁned in Eq. 6 is plotted in Fig. 3 with σ = 2.5˚A.
While generated by a intrin- sically dynamic process, this length is a static measure of correlations in the arrested phase and as such similar to other lengths previously discovered in arrested amor- phous matter.32 Apart from determining the mean relax- ation time, the magnitude of this length gives a geomet- rical explanation on the stability of a glass.9 For a given temperature, glasses produced with slower cooling rates relax on exponentially longer times as their excitations must overcome ever-increasing distances in order to re- lax.
The weak thermal response upon heating through Tag that hyperquenched water exhibits31 is a manifes- tation of the weak correlations between excitations that result under such rapid cooling protocols, which when overcome in hyper-quenched water result in crystalliza- tion.
Such a dependence of the thermal response on this correlation length and the corresponding scaling of this correlation length with cooling rate should be observable by small angle x-ray scattering experiments in amorphous FIG. 3.
Mean distance between excitations locked into the structure of amorphous ice prepared at diﬀerent cooling rates.
The nonequiliubrium correlation length determines the free energy barrier to relaxation in the glass.
Note experimentally only ν > 107 K/min result in direct vitriﬁcation of water.
ice at low temperatures, prepared with diﬀerent cooling rates.
These correlations, which likely result in addi- tional scattering intensity at wave vectors inversely pro- portional to ℓne, are left as a veriﬁable prediction of the microscopic theory applied here.
Cooling rates in excess of 106 K/min must be used to directly vitrify water, thus other protocols must be used in order to generator amor- phous ices with larger nonequiliubrium lengths.
While a limited range of cooling rates for water are practically available experimentally, in principle this dependence of length scale on cooling rate is generic to glass forming systems and could be realized directly in aqueous solu- tions, albeit with diﬀerent Jσ, To.γ and τMF.
In this work, the distribution of excitations is treated in a mean ﬁeld way with one dominate length scale de- termining relaxation.
More complicated nonequilibrium protocols such as pressure amorphization, annealing and polyamorphic transitions, likely generate distributions of excitations characterized by signiﬁcantly diﬀerent corre- lations.
By preparing a material with a more complex protocol it is therefore possible that multiple length scales might be required for an adequate description of relax- ation.
For instance, the signiﬁcant pressure dependence of Jσ8 dictates that amorphous ice produced at high pres- sure is characterized by a nonequilibrium length that is diﬀerent from a corresponding sample of amorphous ice produced at low pressure.
Depending on the relative ordering of these lengths, and if they are signiﬁcantly separated, relaxation of a high pressure amorphous ice heated at low pressure could require a description of re- laxation that incorporates both length scales as typical thermal ﬂuctuations could relax regions characterized by5 the shorter of these two length at lower temperatures than required to relax the entire system.
Such a con- struction can potentially explain observations by Amann- Winkel, et al33 of multi-step relaxation behavior.34 This work presents expressions describing the nonlin- ear response for the simplest nonequilibrium protocol ap- plied to a supercooled liquid: cooling with a speciﬁed constant rate.
As alluded to above, many of the simpliﬁ- cations made for algebraic convenience are not necessary for numerical computations.
Indeed, the consequences of annealing and aging can be taken into account with simple numerical calculations.35 By combining these ex- pressions with the theory for thermal response provided in Ref. 9, the consequences of hyper-quenching rate on the response observed by calorimetry can be analyzed.
That speciﬁc study is left for future work.
Though the focus of this work is on the relaxation behavior of water, where the parameters entering that theory have been determined independently from micro- scopic principles without adjustment, the general phe- nomena accompanying driving a liquid into an amor- phous arrested state are generic.
Supercooled liquids relax with an ever decreasing rate as the temperature is lowered, with dynamics that are hierarchical.
When their structure is arrested any conﬁgurationally rare re- gion that allows for relaxation becomes frozen in.
There- fore, it must be that irreversible relaxation in such an otherwise non-reorganizing material be governed by a temperature independent energy scale.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Aaron Keys and David Chan- dler for helpful discussions.
This research was supported by the Princeton Center for Theoretical Science.
1K. Binder and W. Kob, Glassy Materials and Disordered Solids: An Introduction to Their Statistical Mechanics (Revised Edition) (World Scientiﬁc, 2011).
2P. Br¨uggeller and E. Mayer, Nature 288, 569–571 (1980).
3G. Johari, A. Hallbrucker, and E. Mayer, Nature 330, 552–553 (1987). 4S.
Capaccioli and K. Ngai, The Journal of chemical physics 135, 104504 (2011).
5P. G. Debenedetti, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 15, R1669 (2003).
6M. Oguni, Y. Kanke, A. Nagoe, and S. Namba, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 115, 14023–14029 (2011).
7D. T. Limmer and D. Chandler, Faraday Discussions 167, 485– 498 (2013).
8D. T. Limmer and D. Chandler, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, in press (2014).
9A. S. Keys, J. P. Garrahan, and D. Chandler, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 4482–4487 (2013).
10C. A. Angell, Annual Review Physical Chemistry 55, 559–583 (2004).
11V. Velikov, S. Borick, and C. A. Angell, Science 294, 2335–2338 (2001).
12D. Chandler and J. P. Garrahan, Annual review of physical chem- istry 61, 191 (2010).
13G. Biroli and J. P. Garrahan, The Journal of chemical physics 138, 12A301 (2013).
14R. G. Palmer, D. L. Stein, E. Abrahams, and P. W. Anderson, Physical Review Letters 53, 958 (1984).
15J. J¨ackle and S. Eisinger, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik B Condensed Matter 84, 115–124 (1991).
16J. P. Garrahan and D. Chandler, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100, 9710–9714 (2003).
17A. S. Keys, L. O. Hedges, J. P. Garrahan, S. C. Glotzer, and D. Chandler, Physical Review X 1, 021013 (2011).
18Y. S. Elmatad, D. Chandler, and J. P. Garrahan, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 113, 5563–5567 (2009).
19Y. S. Elmatad, D. Chandler, and J. P. Garrahan, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 114, 17113–17119 (2010).
20D. T. Limmer and D. Chandler, The Journal of Chemical Physics 137, 044509 (2012).
21P. Sollich and M. R. Evans, Physical review letters 83, 3238 (1999).
22Z. Wojnarowska, K. Ngai, and M. Paluch, The Journal of Chem- ical Physics 140, 174502 (2014).
23C. E. Bertrand, Y. Zhang, and S.-H. Chen, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 15, 721–745 (2013).
24C. A. Angell, Science 319, 582–587 (2008).
25D. Kivelson and G. Tarjus, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 105, 6620–6627 (2001).
26R. S. Smith and B. D. Kay, Nature 398, 788–791 (1999).
27C. T. Moynihan, A. J. Easteal, J. Wilder, and J. Tucker, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 78, 2673–2677 (1974).
28R. Br¨uning and K. Samwer, Physical Review B 46, 11318 (1992).
29K. Vollmayr, W. Kob, and K. Binder, Physical Review B 54, 15808 (1996).
30Y. Yue and C. A. Angell, Nature 427, 717–720 (2004).
31I. Kohl, L. Bachmann, E. Mayer, A. Hallbrucker, and T. Loert- ing, Nature 435, E1–E1 (2005).
32 ´E. Marcotte, F. H. Stillinger, and S. Torquato, The Journal of chemical physics 138, 12A508 (2013).
33K. Amann-Winkel, C. Gainaru, P. H. Handle, M. Seidl, H. Nel- son, R. B¨ohmer, and T. Loerting, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 17720–17725 (2013).
34While this work was under review, Ref. 8 demonstrated that this suggestion yields accurate results, as demonstrated with direct simulation and compared with experiment.
35A. S. Keys, D. Chandler, and J. P. Garrahan, arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.7206 (2014).