1          J. Applied Physics, in press)    Magnetic and dielectric behavior of the spin-chain compound Er2BaNiO5 well below its Néel  temperature  Tathamay Basu1, Kiran Singh1,#, N. Mohapatra2, and E.V. Sampathkumaran1     1Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai-400005, India  2School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneshwar, Bhubaneshwar-751013, India    Abstract    We have recently reported that the Haldane spin-chain system, Er2BaNiO5, undergoing  antiferromagnetic  order below (TN= ) 32 K, is characterized by the onset of ferroelectricity near  60K due to magnetoelectric  coupling induced by short-range magnetic-order within spin-chains.
We have carried out additional magnetic  and dielectric studies to understand the properties well below TN.
We emphasize here on the following: (i) A  strong frequency dependent behaviors of  ac magnetic susceptibility and complex dielectric properties  have  been observed at much lower temperatures (< 8 K), that is,   ‘reentrant multiglass-like’ phenomenon,  naturally suggesting the existence of an additional transition well below TN.   ii) ‘Magnetoelectric phase  coexistence’ is observed at very low temperature (e.g., T =2K), where the high-field magnetoelectric phase is  partially arrested on returning to zero magnetic field after a cycling through metamagnetic transition.
#Current address:  UGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research, University Campus, Khandwa Road,  Indore - 452001, India2    INTRODUCTION    The Haldane [1] spin-chain systems of the type, R2BaNiO5 (R= Rare-earths), have been paid a lot of  attention for the past few decades from magnetism angle.
Recently, some members of this family (R= Gd,  Dy, Ho and Er) of oxides attracted  further interest  from the angle  of magnetoelectric (ME) /  magnetodielectric (MDE) coupling phenomenon [2-6].
A systematic study on the Er member [5] suggested  that  a displacive-type mechanism involving magnetic ions is responsible for the onset ferroelectricity well  above its Néel temperature (TN= 32 K)  and that short-range magnetic correlations are interestingly sufficient  enough to induce the same.
In the case of Dy member, it was noted that, in addition to the multiferroic  behavior setting in at (TN=) 58 K, there is an additional transition at temperatures (T) well below TN, as  though there is a 'reentrant phenomenon' into a complex multiglass-like state  below 10 K. Such a  phenomenon is not so commonly known particularly among undoped stoichiometric compounds in the field  of multiferroics, barring a few examples (see, Ref. 5, 7 and articles cited therein), though the concept of  multi-glass was originally  discussed in some doped materials [8].
It is therefore of interest to study low  temperature properties of other members of this family  well below their respective TN.
With this primary  motivation, in this article, we report the results of our investigation on the Er member well below its TN.
The  results reveal that there are glassy anomalies both in magnetization and dielectric properties far below TN,  characterizing that this compound also belongs to a new family of 'reentrant' multiferroic oxides.
Additionally, there are features in the isothermal data attributable to   ‘magnetoelectric phase-co-existence’  phenomenon.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS    Polycrystalline form of the compound, Er2BaNiO5, employed in the present investigation is the same  as that in Ref. 5.
The ac susceptibility (χ) measurements with various frequencies (ν)  with an ac field of 1  Oe were performed as a function of T with the help of a commercial superconducting quantum interference  device (Quantum Design (QD), USA) magnetometer.
In addition, dc magnetization (M) data were obtained  with the help of a commercial (QD) vibrating sample magnetometer.
The complex dielectric permittivity  measurements with different ν were  performed as described in Ref. 5.
All the T-dependent studies were  carried out in the presence of external dc magnetic fields (H) as well.
Unless otherwise stated, all the  measurements were performed during warming after cooling the specimen in the absence of an external  magnetic-field from the paramagnetic state to the desired temperature.
Further experimental details can be  obtained from Ref.
5.    RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  Magnetic and dielectric behavior and multi-glass-like behavior: Though T-dependent dc χ behavior is available in the past literature [9], for the sake of  characterization, we report our results obtained in a field of 100 Oe for zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field- cooled (FC) conditions in figure 1.
The Curie-Weiss temperature and the effective moment obtained from the  linear region in the paramagnetic state are about -11 K (with the negative sign consistent with  antiferromagnetic interaction) and 14μB per formula unit respectively.
We derive that the moment on Ni is ~  3.5 μB /Ni considering the theoretical moment for Er (~ 9.58 μB /Er3+).
The feature at TN is so feeble that this  can be observed in the derivative curve only (see inset (a) in figure 1).
There is a well-defined broad peak at  a lower temperature range, that is, around 16 K.  A careful inspection of the data in the mainframe of figure 1  reveals that there is an upturn in χ(T) with decreasing temperature near 4 K with a tendency for the  bifurcation of zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) curves.
At the same temperature, heat-capacity   (C) data exhibits a shoulder [5].
Similar behavior was observed in the data measured in 5 kOe (not shown  here).
This observation indicates that there is another anomaly around this temperature.
At this moment, it is  worth recalling the evolution process of spontaneous magnetic moments from Er and Ni below TN.
as  revealed by neutron diffraction results [10, 11].
Though spontaneous moment appears for both Er and Ni at  the onset of magnetic ordering, the T-dependencies are markedly different; that is, the increase of the Er  magnetic moment with decreasing temperature was reported to be rather large for Er, whereas the one on Ni  tends to increase only marginally below 30 K. A point to  be  inferred from the previous neutron diffraction  results is that there is no additional well-defined magnetic transition at temperatures well below 32 K;  however, for the magnetic moment on Er, there is a change of curvature over a wide temperature range  around 15- 20 K, followed by a tendency to saturate below 5 K. Clearly, therefore, the anomalies observed in  χ(T) (as well as in heat-capacity [5]) around 16 K should be associated with these broad thermal variations of3    the magnetic moment on Er, and not to any magnetic transition.
It is argued that the 16K-anomalies arise  from the splitting of the Kramer's doublet of trivalent Er by the exchange interaction, followed by  depopulation with decreasing temperature [12].
However, the feature below 4 K could arise from another  subtle magnetic phase transition, and there is also an evidence from Young's modulus reported by Chepurko et al [13].
In order to get a better insight into the nature of magnetic state below 4 K, we have also measured   isothermal remnant magnetization (MIRM) behavior  at various temperatures.
For this purpose, the specimen  was  zero-field-cooled from 300 K to the desired T, then a dc field of 5 kOe was applied  and kept for 10  min; subsequently, the MIRM was measured as a function of time (t) in zero-field.
We could see a decay of  MIRM with time at 2 K (see inset b in figure 1) as expected for spin-glass freezing [14].
The curve was fitted  to  a stretched exponential form ([MIRM (t)/MIRM (0)] = a + b exp[(t/)0.5], where a and b here are coefficients,   is the  relaxation time).
Interestingly, no such magnetic relaxation behavior was observed at T=5 K and  above.
This result suggests that there is a  difference in the magnetic states below and above ~ 5K.     We have measured ac χ response for various values of ν in the magnetically ordered state (see figure  2) and the features in the real part (χ') observed in the data measured in the absence of magnetic-field are  somewhat similar to those observed in the dc χ data.
Additionally, the feature below 6 K shows a ν- dependence with noticeable imaginary component (χ"); it is to be noted that the peak in χ" appears (near 6 K)  only for the highest frequency employed (1.339 kHz), whereas at lower frequencies, just an upturn only  could be observed, as though there is a peak below 2 K for such frequencies.
Viewing together all these data, it appears that the feature in the region 2 - 6 K is quite complex,  attributable to spin-glass-like behavior (in the absence of an external magnetic field), particularly considering  non-vanishing χ" component [14].
The plot of T-dependence of dielectric permittivity (ɛ') and loss factor (tan δ) in the absence of dc  magnetic-field is shown in figure 3(a) at various frequencies.
The results across TN were discussed in Ref.
5  and hence we restrict the present discussions to the data at further lower temperatures.
For this reason, we  have restricted the data in the mainframe to temperatures below 20 K, though we have shown the data in an  extended T-range  in the insets for the zero-field curves for one frequency.
The values of tanδ are very low  consistent with the insulating behavior of this compound, so that the observed features are not extrinsic.
There is a change of curvature in the vicinity of 16-20 K, clearly visible for some frequencies (see insets),  tracking magnetic anomalies in C(T) and χ(T), as though dielectric measurements are sensitive to crystal- field effects.
A  frequency dependent behavior could be seen in the data at low temperatures.
A noteworthy  feature is that there is a fall in ɛ' below 8 K with a concomitant anomaly (a peak) in tanδ.
It is worthwhile to  note that the highest ν (1.339 kHz) employed in ac χ studies is close to the lowest ν (5 kHz) in dielectric  studies and the temperature at which the anomaly is seen in both these data at these frequencies are  somewhat close; as the ν is increased from 5 kHz to 100 kHz, the temperature at which the dielectric  anomaly (say, a fall in ɛ') occurs increases marginally to ~10 K. Considering these observations, one safely  assume that  the 10K-anomaly observed in this property is a consequence  of the magnetic anomaly well  below 6 K.  The inset of figure 3(a) shows the plot of lnν versus inverse of Tp, fitted to Arrhenius law (ν= ν0  exp(-Ea/kBTP),  ν0= pre-exponential factor, Ea= activation energy, TP= peak temperature in χ" ) and it is found  that this plot is linear with an activation energy of 86 K. It was sufficiently stressed earlier [5]  that dielectric  anomalies track the features  (<6K, ~16 K, ~ 32 K) in  C and χ data, speaking in favor of ME coupling in this  compound.
Here we emphasize that the ν-dependence of the features in the same temperature range (below  10 K) both in ac χ and complex dielectric properties prompts us to infer that  this compound exhibits  'reentrant multiglass-like' behavior, taking into account that the coupling occurring near TN is not of a glassy  type, in analogy to the terminology applied for re-entrant spin-glasses.
This observation is interesting, as this  kind of 'reentrant mutiglass phenomenon' has been rarely  reported for stoichiometric compounds, e.g., in   Dy2BaNiO5 [3] and Ca3Co2O6 [7].
As in the case of Dy2BaNiO5, an additional  signature of spin-glass, viz.,   'local dip' (or 'memory effects') in the dc χ experiments, performed with waiting and without waiting at a  given temperature, could not be resolved down to 2 K and hence 'glassiness' is  of a different origin, e.g.,  slow and complex dynamics arising from antiferromagnetically coupled Er and Ni magnetic moments.
Influence of external dc magnetic fields on multiglass-like features:    It is of interest to see how an application of external magnetic fields influences the magnetic and  dielectric features.
For this purpose, the data were collected while warming after cooling the sample in zero  magnetic-field.
It may be recalled [5] that, in  the heat-capacity data taken in the presence of several4    magnetic fields, the temperature at which the peak occurs in C/T (around 16 K) gets lowered gradually with  increasing magnetic fields.
In the same manner, the corresponding broad peak (appearing around 16 K) in ac  χ(T) data for H=0 (see figure 2) also shifts towards low temperatures with the application of magnetic field  (for instance, with the fall in  χ' occurring below around 5K for 30 kOe, see figure 2).
As already remarked,  these features are not  strictly due to magnetic transitions, but  due to an interplay between crystal-field effect  and Zeeman Effect.
The ν-dependent component of χ" appearing below 6 K, which was proposed to arise  from a magnetic anomaly at much lower temperatures also gets suppressed towards a lower temperature  gradually (for instance, the peak in χ" for ν= 1.339 kHz gets shifted from 6 K to 4 K as the H is increased to  30 kOe).
Also, ν-dependent behavior becomes less with the application of magnetic field (for instance,  frequency dependence is ~ 1K for a variation from 1.3 Hz to 1.339 kHz for 30 kOe in χ").
An application of  magnetic field of 50 kOe further suppresses this low T feature, although the data is noisy for highest  frequency.
Figure 3(b) and (c) show the ν-dependent dielectric behavior under application of different magnetic  fields.
As discussed earlier [5] in favour of ME coupling, the peak temperature for a particular frequency  shifts towards lower temperatures with increasing magnetic field, closely tracking the trend observed in χ"  and C(T).
The ν-dependence of the dielectric  behavior gets gradually suppressed with increasing magnetic  field, similar to that observed  in  ac compare the plots in figures 2a and 2d with figures 3a and 3b. It is  interesting to note that the ν-dependent behavior of dielectric constant  persists even in the presence of a   field as high as  80 kOe, though the magnitude of the shift of characteristic temperature gets relatively  reduced (not shown here).
This ν-dependent behavior almost vanishes by an application of a very high field  of 140 kOe [Fig. 3c].
We could not measure ac  above 50 kOe with our equipment for a comparative study  at such high fields.
Nevertheless, we can state  that the tracking of the peak temperatures in ac  and ’  supports  MDE coupling in this compound.
It may be recalled that, for the compound Dy2BaNiO5, with  increasing H, the low-temperature feature due to magnetism shifts towards higher T, whereas the one in  dielectric shifts towards lower T [3].
This difference between Dy and Er compounds could be due to subtle  differences in magnetic interactions and  magnetic structure [9-11].
A signature of magnetoelectric phase coexistence:             Evidence for magnetodielectric coupling was obtained from the steps in the isothermal M(H) and  ɛ'(H) curves  earlier [5].
The isothermal curves obtained by magnetic-field cycling reveals information about  additional phenomenon, namely, phase-coexistence.
The results of such measurements of  ɛ' as a function of  H at different temperatures (with a rate of variation of 70 Oe/s) are presented in the form of  magnetodielectric (Δɛ'=  [(ɛ'H=0- ɛ'H)/ɛ'H=0]) effect in figure 4.
In the virgin curve at 2K, there is a sudden  upturn in the value around 20 kOe (and another weak one near 30 K), tracking the steps in M(H) (see also  Ref. 5).
It appears that these steps are due to disorder-broadened first-order transitions.
As a consequence of  this,  the virgin curve should lie outside the envelope curve for a travel through a first-order transition for any  phenomena [15], in the event that the high-field phase is retained at least partially on returning the magnetic  field to zero, as observed experimentally in our case.
It is thus interesting to note that ɛ' in zero-field after the  field-cycling attains a higher value compared to the virgin state zero-field value, as though there is an  evidence for  'magnetoelectric phase co-existence' phenomenon.
We could not resolve such a signature of  ‘magnetic phase-co-existence’  in the isothermal magnetization data, although  an extremely weak hysteresis  (in the range 20 - 60 kOe)  characteristic of first-order transition is observed around the metamagnetic  transition fields (not shown here).
Additional isothermal measurements were also performed in the following  manner.
The sample was magnetic-field-cooled from paramagnetic region (say, 200 K) to 2K with different  magnetic fields and then the field was removed;  the isothermal field-dependent dielectric measurements  were then performed with a sweep rate of 70 Oe/min (Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)).
It is found that an application of  magnetic field of 50 kOe decreases the degree of partial arrest and this phase-coexistence phenomenon  vanishes by an application of very high fields (say, 140 kOe).
These peculiar features in dielectric (without  similar anomalies in isothermal magnetization) has been  observed by us in another compound Ca3Co2O6 [7],  thereby suggesting that this discrepancy should be more common, thereby tempting the community to search  for similar materials to understand the dynamics associated with dielectric phase coexistence phenomenon.
The feature attributable to phase-coexistence phenomenon is not observed at higher temperatures (above 5  K) [see Fig. 4d for T= 8K], clearly indicating a change in the magnetic state across these temperatures.5        CONCLUSIONS    We have investigated the Haldane spin-chain compound, Er2BaNiO5, at temperatures below its long- range antiferromagnetic ordering temperature of  32 K by ac and dc magnetization as well as dielectric  studies.
Apart from the fact that the dielectric property  captures the features due to the crystal-field effects  proposed in the literature, the results provide evidence for another magnetic anomaly below 6 K. It turns out  that  the 6K-anomaly characterizes this compound 'reentrant multi-glass-like', based on frequency  dependence of ac susceptibility and dielectric properties.
As a manifestation of metamagnetic transition,  ‘magnetoelectric phase coexistence’ is observed at very low temperatures.
Acknowledgments    The authors thank Kartik K Iyer for his valuable help while carrying out experiments.
[1] F.D.M. Haldane, Phys. Lett. 93A, 464 (1983).
[2] K. Singh, T.Basu, S. Chowki, N. Mahapotra, K. K. Iyer, P. L. Paulose and  E. V.  Sampathkumaran, Phys.
Rev. B 88,  094438 (2013).
[3] T. Basu, P. L. Paulose, K. K. Iyer, K. Singh, N. Mohapatra, S. Chowki, B. Gonde and E. V.  Sampathkumaran, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 26, 172202 (2014).
[4] G. Nénert and T. T. M. Palstra, Phys.
Rev. B 76, 024415 (2007).
[5] T. Basu, V.V. Ravi Kishore, S. Gohil, K. Singh, N. Mohapatra, S. Bhattacharjee, B.  Gonde, N.P. Lalla, P. Mahadevan, S. Ghosh and E.V. Sampathkumaran, Sci. Rep. 4,  5636 (2014).
[6] S. Chowki, T. Basu, K. Singh, N. Mohapatra, and E.V. Sampathkumaran, J. App.
Phys. 115, 214107 (2014).
[7] T. Basu, K. K. Iyer, K. Singh and E. V. Sampathkumaran, Sci. Rep. 3, 3104  (2013);  T. Basu, K. Singh and E.V. Sampathkumaran, J. Phys: Condens. Matter. 25, 496013  (2013).
[8] V.V. Shvartsmnn, S. Bedanta, P. Borisov, W. Kleeman, A. Tkach, and P.M. Vilarinho,   Phys. Rev. Lett.
101, 165704 (2008); D. D. Choudhury, et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
108, 127201  (2012); K. Singh, A. Maignan, C. Simon, S. Kumar, C. Martin, O. Lebedev, S. Turner, and  G. Van Tendeloo, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter.
24, 226002 (2012); Y. Yamaguchi, T. Nakano,  Y. Nozue, and T. Kimura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 057203 (2012).
[9] E. Garcia-Matres, J. L. Garcia-Munoz, J.L. Martinez and J. Rodriguez-Carvajal, J. Magn. Magn.
Mat. 149, 363 (1995).
[10]  J. A. Alonso, J. Amador, J. L. Martinez, I. Rasines, J. Rodriguez-Carvajal, R. Saez-   Puche, Solid State Commun. 76, 467 (1990).
[11]  E. Garcia-Matres, J. L. Martinez and J. Rodriguez-Carvajal, Eur. Phys.
J. B. 24, 59    (2001).
[12]  M.N. Popova, S.A. Klimin, E.P. Chukalina, R.Z. Levitin, B.V. Mill, B.Z.    Malkin, and E.   Antic-Fidancev, J. Alloys and comp. 380, 84 (2004).
[13]  G.G. Chepurko, Z.A. Kazei, D.A. Kudrjavtsev, R.Z. Levitin, B.V. Mill, M.N.    Popova, and V.V. Snegirev, Phys. Lett. A 157, 81 (1991).
[14]  K. Binder, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 801 (1986).
[15]  See, for instance, S.B. Roy, J. Phys:  Condens Matter, 25, 183201 (2013); S.B. Roy    and P. Chaddah, Phase Transitions 77, 767  (2004);  Kartik K( Iyer and E.V.    Sampathkumaran, App. Phys. Lett.
95, 142504 (2009);6    Figure 1: Dc magnetization divided by magnetic-field as a function of temperature (1.8 - 40K) obtained  in 100 Oe for  zero-field-cooled and field-cooled conditions of the specimen.
Inset (a) shows the derivative curve to  highlight the feature at TN .
Inset (b) shows isothermal remnant magnetization as a function of time (t) at  1.8K, obtained as described in the text.
Figure 2:  Real (χ') and imaginary (χ") parts of   ac susceptibility as a function of temperature below 20 K  in 0, 10, 30,  and 50 kOe, obtained with various frequencies.
In the inset, the zero-field data over an extended T-range  is  shown to highlight the broad peak around 16 K.    Figure 3:   (a)  Dielectric constant (’) and the loss factor (tan) as a function of temperature  below 20 K (in the  absence of an external magnetic field), obtained with various frequencies.
The curves obtained at higher  fields are shown in (b) and (c) for 50  and 140 kOe respectively.
The arrows are shown to identify the curves  with increasing frequency.
In the insets of (a) and (b), the curves for 5 kHz are shown over an extended T- range.
In another inset of (a), Arrhenius plot is shown.
Figure 4: The fractional change in dielectric constant as a function of magnetic field (a) at 2 K for zero-field-cooled  (ZFC) condition, (b) at 2 K for field-cooled (FC) from 200K with H= 50kOe, (c) at 2 K for field-cooled from  200K  with H=140 kOe, and (d) at 8 K for ZFC  condition, obtained with a frequency of 50 kHz.
Arrows and  numericals  are  placed to show the direction of magnetic-field variation from the starting point.
The plots  around zero-field region are shown in an expanded form separately in the insets in (a) and (d).
Figure 1:7      Figure 2:8        Figure 39      Figure 4