1    Band-asymmetry-driven nonreciprocal electronic transport   in a helimagnetic semimetal α-EuP3    Alex Hiro Mayo1*, Darius-Alexandru Deaconu2, Hidetoshi Masuda1, Yoichi Nii1, Hidefumi Takahashi3,  Rodion Vladimirovich Belosludov1, Shintaro Ishiwata3, Mohammad Saeed Bahramy2, and Yoshinori Onose1  1Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University; Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8577, Japan.
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, School of Natural Sciences, The University of Manchester, Oxford  Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom  3Division of Materials Physics, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka  560-8531, Japan.
*Corresponding author.
Email: alex.hiro.mayo.d1@tohoku.ac.jp      Abstract  Chiral magnetic textures give rise to unconventional magnetotransport phenomena such as the  topological Hall effect and nonreciprocal electronic transport.
While the correspondence between  real-space magnetic topology/symmetry and such transport phenomena has been well established,  a microscopic understanding based on the spin-dependent band structure in momentum space  remains elusive.
Here we demonstrate how a chiral magnetic structure in real space introduces an  asymmetry in the electronic band structure and triggers a nonreciprocal electronic transport in a  centrosymmetric helimagnet α-EuP3.
The magnetic structure of α-EuP3 is highly tunable by a  magnetic field and closely coupled to its semi-metallic electronic band structure, enabling a  systematic study across chiral and achiral magnetic phases on the correspondence between  nonreciprocal transport and electronic band asymmetry.
Our findings reveal how a microscopic  change in the magnetic configuration of charge carriers can lead to nonreciprocal electronic  transport, paving the way for designing chiral magnets with desirable properties.2    Introduction    Chirality is the breaking of mirror symmetry.
The concept of chirality is applicable in a wide  range of scientific fields, from high-energy physics to biology(1).
In condensed matter, the chirality  caused by the crystal structure is primarily studied.
However, there is a distinct class of materials  where the magnetic structure induces chirality.
In particular, in helimagnets, the spiral arrangement  of magnetic moments breaks the mirror symmetry, thus inducing chirality.
The topological  magnetic textures denoted as a skyrmion lattice can be viewed as the superposition of several  helimagnetic structures(2, 3).
The chiral magnetic textures give rise to a number of unique physical  properties, among which the nonreciprocal electronic transport has been extensively studied  recently(4–7).
Nonreciprocal electronic transport is the rectification of electric conduction in systems without  spatial-inversion ( ) and time-reversal ( ) symmetries(8–12).
When the crystal structure breaks  , the mechanism is well-understood.
For example, in BiTeBr(13), the polar crystal structure  induces a Rashba-type spin splitting in the electronic structure.
Then, an applied magnetic field  gives rise to the asymmetry of the electronic band structure, causing a rectification effect.
On the  other hand, in chiral magnetic textures with a centrosymmetric crystal structure, the arrangement  of the spins breaks   in a distinct manner such that it gives rise to a finite chirality in the system.
The nonreciprocal electronic transport has been studied in chiral magnets such as MnP(6),  MnAu2(7), showing a sizeable effect of magnetic chirality on electronic transport.
However, the  mechanism of nonreciprocal electronic transport in the helimagnetic systems remains unclear.
In this article, through a combination of nonreciprocal electronic transport experiment and first- principles band calculation, we demonstrate that the nonreciprocal electronic transport is induced  by the asymmetry of the band structure in a helimagnetic semimetal α-EuP3.
α-EuP3 has a  centrosymmetric crystal structure with a monoclinic space-group type C2/m(14), characterized by3    a single mirror plane perpendicular to the twofold rotational b-axis (Fig. 1A).
The 4f-states of the  divalent Eu ions are highly localized and relatively close in energy to the Fermi level, thus behave  as local magnetic moments interacting through carrier-mediated Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida  coupling(15–17).
Results and Discussion    It has been recently noted that α-EuP3 exhibits a characteristic interplay between magnetism and  electronic structure, leading to unusual magnetotransport responses such as a large anomalous Hall  effect caused by a topological transition(14).
However, the discussion was mainly for the  paramagnetic regime, and therefore the transport involving the magnetically ordered regime  remains unraveled.
Figure 1B shows the field-temperature phase diagram of α-EuP3 based on  resistivity and magnetization measurements under magnetic fields applied along the a-axis.
Two  low-temperature magnetic phases are observed, consistent with the previously reported results of  isostructural P-rich Eu(As1-xPx)3(18–21).
The system undergoes two incommensurate phases upon  decreasing temperature: a sinusoidal phase and, at lower temperatures, a helimagnetic phase.
Both  phases have almost the same magnetic propagation vector (q ~ (-0.726, 0, 0.255) and (-0.726, 0,  0.222), respectively(18–20)), nearly parallel to the crystalline a-axis.
Under an applied magnetic  field along the a-axis, approximately perpendicular to the helical plane, the magnetic structure first  forms a conical structure.
As the field increases, it is naturally expected that at some point the cone  collapses into a fan structure(22), where the moment along the c-axis vanishes and leaves an  oscillating component along the magnetically easy b-axis.
Eventually, this evolution ends in a field- forced ferromagnetic (FM) configuration.
The above process is schematically shown in Fig. 1C. As can be seen, the symmetry constraints  in this system forbids any energy degeneracy between an electronic state with momentum kq and  spin sq, E(kq, sq), with E(-kq, sq) or  E(kq, -sq), where kq and sq are components along the helimagnetic4    propagation vector q.
This results in a symmetric spin-polarized band structure in the helimagnetic  phase.
Applying a magnetic field along q, where the conical magnetic structure is realized, causes  an asymmetry in the band structure, which we later show induces nonreciprocity in the electronic  transport.
When the magnetic field is strong enough, the band structure becomes symmetric again  with a fan-shaped achiral magnetic structure.
Eventually, all spins are fully aligned with the  magnetic field, leading to an FM structure.
The variation of the band structure in the course of  magnetic phase transitions was partly discussed in a simplified theoretical model(23) but has never  been observed in a real material.
The resistivity in helimagnets along the propagation vector can be described up to the nonlinear  regime as  ρ(j) = ρ1 + ρ2j + ⋅⋅⋅    (1),  where ρ1 (= ρ1ω) and ρ2 reflect the ordinary resistivity and nonlinear resistivity, respectively, and j  is the electric current density.
The second term can be sensitively measured as a second-harmonic  voltage under an ac electric current j = j0 sinωt(8);  E = ρ1ω j0 sinωt + ρ2ω j0 (1 – cos2ωt) + ⋅⋅⋅  (2).
ρ2ω = ρ2j0/2 is composed of field-symmetric and field-asymmetric components as ρ2ω = ρ2ωsym +  ρ2ωasym, where ρ2ωsym(+H) = ρ2ωsym(-H) and ρ2ωasym(+H) = -ρ2ωasym(-H).
ρ2ωasym is caused by the  nonreciprocal electronic transport while ρ2ωsym may be induced by some extrinsic effect such as the  effect of electrode contact.
Because ρ2ω   j0, a large electric current density j0 is preferred for the  measurement of nonlinear electronic transport.
To realize a large current density, the α-EuP3 single  crystal sample was microfabricated into a device with a cross-sectional area of ~ 8 × 4 μm2 (Fig.  2A), using the focused ion-beam (FIB) technique(24).
The temperature dependence of resistivity  for the FIB sample clearly shows two magnetic transitions at low temperatures (Fig. 2B).
The  overall resistivity behavior is consistent with previously reported bulk sample results(14), assuring  the device quality.5    Fig. 2C exemplifies the second-harmonic resistivity ρ2ω as a function of the magnetic field at 4.2  K, measured by a lock-in amplifier.
ρ2ω shows an evident field-asymmetric behavior with minimal  hysteresis.
ρ2ω seems mostly composed of an intrinsic nonreciprocal electronic resistivity ρ2ωasym,  which is induced by the finite chirality of the system arising from helimagnetic order.
Fig. 2D  shows the field asymmetric component ρ2ωasym = (ρ2ω0 → +1T(+H) - ρ2ω0 → -1T(-H))/2, where the  subscripts of ρ2ω0 → +1T and ρ2ω0 → -1T describe the sweeping direction of the magnetic field.
Note  that the sign and magnitude are not reproduced in each measurement.
This is because there are two  energetically degenerate chiral states in the centrosymmetric crystal α-EuP3, and the chiral domain  population differs in each measurement.
Recent studies on centrosymmetric helimagnetic metals  with Mn magnetic moments have reported that the helimagnetic chirality can be controlled by  traversing the achiral-chiral transition while simultaneously applying a magnetic field and a high- density dc electric current(6, 7, 25, 26).
The sign of the controlled chirality depends on whether the  magnetic field and dc current are parallel or antiparallel.
Following these reports, we have  attempted to control the chirality by a similar procedure with the magnetic field Hp and dc current  Jp before the measurement of ρ2ω shown in Figs. 2C and 2D (for the details of the procedure, see  the Supporting Information).
As shown in Fig. 2D, the sign of ρ2ωasym does not depend on Hp and Jp  but seems random, indicating the control procedure was not effective in α-EuP3.
Nevertheless, the  magnetic field variations were generally reproducible.
Notably, ρ2ωasym shows a complex magnetic  field dependence.
As the magnetic field is increased from 0 T, it first shows a broad peak and then  steeply changes accompanying a sign change followed by a sharp peak.
Fig. 2E shows the magnetic  field dependence of ρ2ωasym measured at temperatures of 4.2 K, 6.1 K, 8.0 K, and 10.0 K. The ρ2ω  measurements were done several times at each temperature, and the presented data correspond to  the maximum response obtained.
ρ2ωasym distinctly demonstrates nonreciprocity only within the  chiral magnetic phase (4.2 K and 6.1 K) and vanishes in the achiral phases (8.0 K and 10.0 K).
These results clearly show the correspondence between ρ2ωasym and the magnetic symmetry.6    Let us now examine the detailed magnetic field dependence of the ρ2ωasym signal across chiral- achiral transitions.
Fig. 3D displays the nonreciprocal electronic response at 4.2 K while sweeping  the magnetic field from +4 T to -4 T without any chitrality-control procedure, with the data  antisymmetrized as ρ2ωasym = [ρ2ω(+H) - ρ2ω(-H)]/2.
This antisymmetrization is valid when the  magnetic hysteresis is negligible, as confirmed in Fig. 2C.
The obtained data is scaled to that shown  in Fig. 2E by multiplying a constant.
The ρ2ωasym signal shows a sharp peak around B1 ~ 0.7 T. In  the high field region, ρ2ωasym gradually decreases and vanishes at around B2 ~ 2.5 T. For comparison,  we plot the magnetic field dependences of magnetization M and its field derivative, longitudinal  resistivity ρxx, and Hall resistivity ρyx in Figs. 3A-C. Clear anomalies at B2 and B3 ~ 3.1 T correspond  to the transition from conical to fan and from fan to field-forced FM phases, respectively.
The  disappearance of ρ2ωasym at B2 is again in excellent agreement with the magnetic symmetry (Fig.  1B).
In addition, a slight anomaly is discerned in the derivative of magnetization around B1.
In  contrast, this B1 anomaly is conspicuously observed in the longitudinal and Hall resistivities, both  showing a peak.
In a previous paper, Mayo et al.(14) reported a Fermi surface reconstruction  induced by the FM polarization of Eu 4f moments, occurring at an approximate threshold  magnetization of M ~ 1.8 μB/Eu.
The observed anomalies at B1 indeed correspond to a similar  magnetization as the reported threshold.
The fact that the anomaly is notable in the transport  properties and less visible in magnetization suggests a strong role of the Fermi surface in the  observed nonreciprocity (for further notes on magnetotransport results, see the Supporting  Information).
To understand how the experimentally observed nonreciprocity in α-EuP3 arises from  microscopic changes in its band structure, we have conducted first-principles band calculations for  the relevant magnetic structures; helical, conical, fan, and FM (see Methods and Supporting  Information).
We construct each magnetic phase by appropriately constraining the directions of Eu  magnetic moments in a sufficiently large supercell as shown in Supplementary Fig. S8.
It is to be7    noted that the reported helical magnetic order is incommensurate and slightly tilted from the  crystalline a-axis (q ~ (-0.726, 0, 0.255)).
We have instead considered a commensurate  helimagnetic model with q = (-0.75, 0, 0) and a helical plane perpendicular to q for the sake of  simplicity.
To model the intermediate phases induced by the magnetic field, the Eu magnetic  moments were gradually tilted along the a-axis through a systematic linear interpolation between  the helimagnetic and ferromagnetic phase.
This resulted in a net magnetization along the a-axis  with a conical magnetic configuration, which we used to find its corresponding magnetic field in  our experimental setup μ0H // a in this phase.
The fan structure was separately constructed by  setting the c*-axis (c* // a × b) components of the magnetic moments to zero and collapsing the  conical structure.
Fig. 4A displays the band structure calculated for each of these magnetic phases  along the -Y – Γ – +Y direction, corresponding to the a*-axis direction (a* // b × c).
As can be seen,  in the helical phase (M = 0 μB/Eu), the spin degeneracy is lifted due to a spin dependent shift along  the Y direction rather than a Zeeman-like splitting, characteristic to a  -broken system.
It should  be noted that the momentum dependent spin splitting seen here differs from the Rashba-type, in  which the shifted direction in momentum space is perpendicular to the spin direction.
Rather, the  spin direction of the split bands is parallel to the direction of momentum shift, similar to the case  of chiral materials such as Te(27).
Nonetheless, the overall band structure is symmetric along -Y –  Γ – +Y.  Upon introducing a conical deformation in the magnetic structure, achieved through applying a  relatively weak magnetization along the a-axis, a notable transformation unfolds within the band  structure, evident as a pronounced asymmetry in the band dispersions along -Y – Γ – +Y. This  asymmetry implies a discernible distinction in the charge current induced by an electric field +E  as compared to that of -E.
Consequently, the system is anticipated to manifest a finite nonreciprocal  electronic resistivity within the conical phase.
Remarkably, as the magnetic phase transitions away  from the conical phase into the achiral fan magnetic or ferromagnetic phase, a restoration of8    symmetry becomes apparent in the band structure along -Y – Γ – +Y, as illustrated in Fig. 1C.
This  intriguing finding provides compelling evidence as to why nonreciprocal electronic transport is  exclusively observable in the conical magnetic structure and explains how this distinct asymmetry  in the band dispersions is responsible for it.
To further discuss the effect of field variation in the conical magnetic state, we turn our attention  to the conical angle dependence of the band structure.
Fig. 4B schematically illustrates the conical  angle dependent evolution of the relevant Fermi pockets.
Here we show the pockets corresponding  to the energy level indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. 4A.
As can be seen they appear as two  symmetric pockets in the helimagnetic state, as expected.
However, upon tilting the magnetic  moments along the a-axis and, hence, increasing the conical angle, an asymmetric deformation of  the energy pockets emerges.
In the FM state, the energy pockets regain symmetry.
Another notable feature seen in the experiment is a sharp sign change followed by a negative  peak in ρ2ωasym under increasing magnetization (Fig. 4C).
As a measure of band asymmetry, we plot  the residual density of states, defined as the difference between the total density of states for +ka*  and that obtained for -ka*, in the conical phase as a function of conical magnetization in Fig. 4D.
As can be seen, it initially shows a positive value followed by a sign change and a discernible  negative peak.
This behavior is consistent with the experimental observation of the nonreciprocal  resistivity (Fig. 4C).
Despite its apparent simplicity, it is remarkable that our theoretical model not  only captures but also qualitatively agrees with the experiment, further providing compelling  evidence that the nonreciprocal electronic transport is induced by the asymmetry in the momentum- space electronic bands.
In summary, we have investigated nonreciprocal electronic transport in a magnetic semimetal α- EuP3.
The material facilitates successive tunability of the magnetic structure from helimagnetic to  induced ferromagnetic structures via conical and fan structures in response to a magnetic field,  presenting a rich array of transport responses coupled with the magnetic phases.
The nonreciprocal9    electronic transport was found to arise as the chiral magnetic structure imposes an asymmetric  deformation in the electronic band structure, and vanish as the magnetic structure is tuned into an  achiral phase, restoring symmetry in momentum space.
Moreover, a singular sign change of  nonreciprocal electronic transport in the middle of the conical phase is observed, seemingly caused  by the reversal of band asymmetry in the course of the dramatic exchange splitting inherent in this  material.
These results unravel that the nonreciprocal electronic transport in helimagnets originates  from the band asymmetry caused by the magnetic chirality.
Our findings suggest that the  understanding of the electronic band structure in the momentum space is indispensable also for  designing the novel functionality in the chiral magnetic textures.10    Materials and Methods    Single crystal growth and crystal identification Single crystals of α-EuP3 were grown by the high-pressure synthesis method(14).
The crystal  was identified as α-EuP3 by powder and single crystal X-ray diffraction techniques.
FIB-microfabrication of transport devices  The Hall bar device was fabricated using the focused ion-beam (FIB) technique(24) in the  following steps: First, a small piece of single crystal α-EuP3 with an approximate size of 100 × 50  × 8 μm³ was placed on an oxidized single-crystal silicon wafer.
Next, 20 nm of Pt was deposited  by RF magnetron sputtering, followed by 200 nm of Au deposited by electron beam evaporation,  both covering the entire sample.
The sample was then fixed to the substrate by FIB-assisted Pt  deposition, ensuring electrical contact between the sample and substrate electrodes, and then was  patterned into a Hall bar by FIB.
Finally, the Pt/Au layer on the central top surface of the Hall bar  channel was etched away by FIB.
Magnetotransport measurements For the bulk measurements, electrode contacts were made by depositing 200 nm of Au on the  sample and connecting Au wires using silver paste (see Supplementary Figure S4).
Both bulk and  FIB samples were subjected to transport measurements in a superconducting magnet.
The ac  resistivities were measured using the four-wire configuration and the standard lock-in technique,  applying an ac electric current with a frequency of 11.15 Hz.
The ac electric current density applied  for the second-harmonic resistivity measurement in the FIB sample was set to an amplitude of  1×107 A/m2.
Band structure calculations The electronic structure calculations were performed within density functional theory (DFT)  using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional(28) as implemented in  the VASP program(29).
To properly treat the strong on-site Coulomb interaction of Eu-4f states,11    an effective Hubbard-like potential term Ueff was added to the PBE functional.
The value of Ueff  was fixed at 6 eV for Eu-4f orbitals(30) and zero for all other orbitals.
Relativistic effects including  spin-orbit coupling were fully taken into account.
The cut-off energy for plane waves forming the  basis set was set to 400 eV. The lattice parameters and atomic positions were taken from  experiment(14).
The corresponding Brillouin zone for the supercell calculation was sampled using  a 2 × 8 × 8 k-mesh.
The calculation for each magnetic structure was carried out by imposing the  corresponding magnetic moment configurations on the Eu site.
The density-of-states calculations  were performed using a 64-band effective Hamiltonian, downfolded from the DFT calculations  using maximally localized Wannier functions(31).
The sampling of the corresponding Brillouin  zone was done using a 240 × 240 × 240 k-mesh.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Y. Kodama and T. J. Konno for providing thorough technical assistance in  using the FIB technique, and T. Taniguchi and M. Fujita for the single crystal x-ray measurements.
The authors also acknowledge Y. Fujishiro, H. Sakai, and M. Kimata for their insightful advice  regarding the device fabrication process.
This study was supported in part by Japan Society for the  Promotion of Science KAKENHI (Grant No. 21H01036, 22H04461, 22J01078, 22KJ0212,  22H00343, 23H04871, 23K13654).
This study was partially supported by the Center for Integrated  Nanotechnology Support (CINTS) at Tohoku University and also by the Advanced Research  Infrastructure for Materials and Nanotechnology (ARIM) project of the Ministry of Education,  Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the  Center for Computational Materials Science at the Institute for Materials Research for allocations  on the MASAMUNE- IMR supercomputer system (Project no. 202112-SCKXX-0510).
M.S.B.  acknowledges support from Leverhulme Trust (Grant No. RPG-2023-253).
D.-A.D. had support  from EPSRC Standard Research Studentship (DTP) EP/T517823/1.12    References  1.
L. D. Barron, From cosmic chirality to protein structure: Lord Kelvin’s legacy.
Chirality  24, 879–893 (2012).
2. Y. Tokura, N. Kanazawa, Magnetic Skyrmion Materials. Chem.
Rev. 121, 2857–2897  (2021).
3. K. Shimizu, S. Okumura, Y. Kato, Y. Motome, Spin moiré engineering of topological  magnetism and emergent electromagnetic fields. Phys.
Rev. B 103, 184421 (2021).
4. T. Yokouchi, et al., Electrical magnetochiral effect induced by chiral spin fluctuations. Nat. Commun. 8, 866 (2017).
5. R. Aoki, Y. Kousaka, Y. Togawa, Anomalous Nonreciprocal Electrical Transport on  Chiral Magnetic Order. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 057206 (2019). 6.
N. Jiang, Y. Nii, H. Arisawa, E. Saitoh, Y. Onose, Electric current control of spin helicity  in an itinerant helimagnet. Nat. Commun. 11, 1601 (2020).
7. H. Masuda, et al., Room temperature chirality switching and detection in a helimagnetic  MnAu2 thin film. Nat. Commun. 15, 1999 (2024).
8. Y. Tokura, N. Nagaosa, Nonreciprocal responses from non-centrosymmetric quantum  materials. Nat. Commun. 9, 3740 (2018). 9.
G. L. Rikken, J. Fölling, P. Wyder, Electrical magnetochiral anisotropy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 236602 (2001). 10.
G. L. J. A. Rikken, P. Wyder, Magnetoelectric anisotropy in diffusive transport. Phys.  Rev. Lett. 94, 016601 (2005). 11.
V. Krstić, S. Roth, M. Burghard, K. Kern, G. L. J. A. Rikken, Magneto-chiral anisotropy  in charge transport through single-walled carbon nanotubes. J. Chem.
Phys. 117, 11315– 11319 (2002). 12.
F. Pop, P. Auban-Senzier, E. Canadell, G. L. J. A. Rikken, N. Avarvari, Electrical  magnetochiral anisotropy in a bulk chiral molecular conductor. Nat. Commun. 5, 3757  (2014). 13.
T. Ideue, et al., Bulk rectification effect in a polar semiconductor. Nat.
Phys. 13, 578–583  (2017).
14. A. H. Mayo, et al., Magnetic Generation and Switching of Topological Quantum Phases  in a Trivial Semimetal α−EuP3. Phys. Rev. X. 12 (2022). 15.
M. A. Ruderman, C. Kittel, Indirect Exchange Coupling of Nuclear Magnetic Moments  by Conduction Electrons. Phys.
Rev. 96, 99–102 (1954).13    16.
T. Kasuya, A Theory of Metallic Ferro- and Antiferromagnetism on Zener’s Model. Prog. Theor.
Phys. 16, 45–57 (1956). 17.
K. Yosida, Magnetic Properties of Cu-Mn Alloys. Phys.
Rev. 106, 893–898 (1957). 18.
P. J. Brown, T. Chattopadhyay, The helimagnetic structure of Eu(As0.20P0.80)3 determined  by zero-field neutron polarimetry. J. Phys. Condens.
Matter 9, 9167 (1997). 19.
T. Chattopadhyay, P. J. Brown, H. G. von Schnering, Sine-wave---to---helimagnetic  transition in phosphorus-rich Eu(As1-xPx)3. Phys.
Rev. B 36, 7300–7302 (1987). 20.
T. Chattopadhyay, P. J. Brown, P. Thalmeier, W. Bauhofer, H. G. von Schnering,  Neutron-diffraction study of the magnetic ordering in EuAs3, Eu(As1-xPx)3, and β-EuP3. Phys.
Rev. B 37, 269–282 (1988). 21.
Y. Ōnuki, et al., Magnetic and Fermi Surface Properties of Semimetals EuAs3 and  Eu(As1−xPx)3. J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 92, 114703 (2023). 22.
J. Jensen, A. R. Mackintosh, Rare Earth Magnetism (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991).
23. A. Zadorozhnyi, Y. Dahnovsky, Anomalous Hall effect in conical helimagnetic crystals. Phys.
Rev. B 107, 035202 (2023). 24.
P. J. W. Moll, Focused Ion Beam Microstructuring of Quantum Matter. Annu. Rev.  Condens.
Matter Phys. 9, 147–162 (2018). 25.
N. Jiang, et al., Chirality Memory Stored in Magnetic Domain Walls in the  Ferromagnetic State of MnP. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 177205 (2021). 26. J.-I.
Ohe, Y. Onose, Chirality control of the spin structure in monoaxial helimagnets by  charge current. Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 042407 (2021). 27.
M. Sakano, et al., Radial Spin Texture in Elemental Tellurium with Chiral Crystal  Structure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 136404 (2020). 28.
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made  Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865–3868 (1996). 29.
Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package, Version 5.3.5 (2014).
30. A. S. Borukhovich, A. V. Troshin, Europium Monoxide: Semiconductor and  Ferromagnet for Spintronics (Springer, 2018). 31.
A. A. Mostofi, et al., An updated version of wannier90: A tool for obtaining maximally- localised Wannier functions. Comput. Phys. Commun.
185, 2309–2310 (2014).14        Figure 1.
Crystal, magnetic, and expected band structures in α-EuP3.
(A) Crystal structure of α-EuP3.
The localized Eu-4f moments couple with the itinerant electrons  in the system, which consist of P-3p and Eu-6s orbitals.
(B) Field-temperature phase diagram of α- EuP3 for a magnetic field μ0H // a, approximately aligned with the propagation vector q of the  magnetic phases.
(C) Schematic illustrations of the symmetrically expected relationship between  the real-space magnetic structure and the momentum-space band structure.
Although the band  structures are symmetric under helical, fan, and ferromagnetic structures, the conical magnetic  structure induced by a moderate magnetic field applied along the q-vector gives rise to an  asymmetrical deformation of the band structure along the k-path in the q-vector direction.15      Figure 2.
Nonreciprocal electronic transport measured in a microfabricated α-EuP3 sample.
(A) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the microfabricated α-EuP3 sample by the FIB  technique.
(B) Temperature dependence of resistivity near the magnetic transition temperatures for  the microfabricated sample.
The inset shows the resistivity data up to room temperature.
(C)  Magnetic field dependence of the second-harmonic resistivity ρ2ω after the attempt of chirality  control with anti-parallel magnetic field and electric current (Hp > 0, Jp < 0).
The red (pink) marker  indicates the field increase (decrease) sweep.
(D) Field-asymmetric component of the second- harmonic resistivity ρ2ωasym measured after attempting the chirality control with the magnetic field  Hp and electric current Jp.
The blue and red markers indicate the parallel and anti-parallel Hp and  Jp , respectively.
(E) Temperature dependence of the maximum field-asymmetric component of the  second-harmonic resistivity ρ2ωasym.16      Figure 3.
Magnetic field dependence of transport and magnetic properties across chiral- achiral phase transitions.
Magnetic field dependence of the (A) magnetization M and its field derivative, (B) longitudinal  resistivity ρxx, (C) transverse (Hall) resistivity ρyx, and (D) ρ2ωasym, at T = 4.2 K under μ0H // a up to  4 T. (A-C) were measured in bulk samples and (D) was measured in the FIB sample.
ρ2ωasym shown  in blue in panel D was measured without attempting chirality control.
The magnitude is adjusted to  match the maximum value presented in Fig. 2D.17 Figure 4.
Electronic band structures of α-EuP3 in each magnetically ordered state.
(A) The electronic band structures in the helimagnetic, conical, fan, and field-forced ferromagnetic  (FM) states, respectively.
The calculation was carried out by tilting the Eu magnetic moments along  the a-axis and imposing the magnetic structures corresponding to the experimental setup of μ0H //  a. (B) Schematic of the field evolution of the Fermi pockets derived from a single electron band  denoted in panel A in the conical magnetic state.
(C) Magnetization dependence of experimental  ρ2ωasym.
(D) Magnetization dependence of the difference in the calculated density of states between  +ka* and -ka* in the conical magnetic state.1      Supporting Information for  Band-asymmetry-driven nonreciprocal electronic transport   in a helimagnetic semimetal α-EuP3      Alex Hiro Mayo1*, Darius-Alexandru Deaconu2, Hidetoshi Masuda1, Yoichi Nii1, Hidefumi Takahashi3,  Rodion Vladimirovich Belosludov1, Shintaro Ishiwata3, Mohammad Saeed Bahramy2, and Yoshinori Onose1    1Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University; Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8577, Japan.
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, School of Natural Sciences, The University of Manchester, Oxford  Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom    3Division of Materials Physics, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka  560-8531, Japan.
*Corresponding author.
Email: alex.hiro.mayo.d1@tohoku.ac.jp    Section 1.
Multiple trials of the chirality-control procedure  Figure S1 schematically illustrates the relation between the chirality-control procedure and the  magnetic phases in α-EuP3.
In a centrosymmetric helimagnet, the opposing chirality are energetically degenerate and  therefore the system will basically form magnetic domains of opposite chirality when undergoing  helimagnetic ordering.
In a recent study, Jiang et al.[6] reported that the helimagnetic chirality in a  centrosymmetric crystal can be controlled by traversing the achiral-chiral transition while  simultaneously applying a magnetic field and a high-density dc electric current, which they referred  to as the “poling” procedure.
The simultaneous application of the magnetic field and the electric  current lifts the degeneracy relevant to the chirality and energetically favors one chirality over the  other, depending on whether the magnetic field and dc current are parallel or antiparallel.
A  sufficiently large electric current density is essential for this procedure; thus, microfabrication of  the sample is again vitally important.
Jiang et al. achieved chirality-control in centrosymmetric  MnP, controlling the system into a single chirality domain.
A constant dc electric current density  in the order of 1×109 A/m2 was applied while sweeping the magnetic field, traversing the achiral- chiral phase boundary.
It was also confirmed that the chirality can be switched to the opposite sign  depending on the parallel/antiparallel application of the magnetic field and electrical current.
The  effectiveness of the poling procedure was also demonstrated in another Mn-based centrosymmetric  metal MnAu2[7].
Following these reports, we have attempted to control the chirality by a similar procedure with  the magnetic field Hp and dc current Jp before the measurement of ρ2ω.
Because the current induced2    heating is significant at the low temperature region, we utilized the sample’s Joule heating to  traverse the magnetic phases, as an alternative to sweeping the chamber temperature.
Figure S1  shows how the system traverses through magnetic phases during the poling procedure.
A magnetic  field of Hp = 1.5 T was first applied.
Then, the magnitude of the dc electric current density was  slowly applied up to Jp = ±1×108 A/m2, traversing the magnetic phases and resulting in the  paramagnetic (PM) phase due to Joule heating.
Then, after slowly sweeping the dc current back  down to zero, undergoing the magnetic transitions from PM to fan and fan to conical, successively,  the magnetic field was quenched.
This procedure with Hp > 0, Jp < 0 was executed prior to the  measurement presented in Fig. 2C. Same measurements were repeated three times each with Hp >  0, Jp < 0 (antiparallel poling, shown in red) and with Hp > 0, Jp > 0 (parallel poling, shown in blue),  presented in Figure 2D.
The grey arrows in Figure S1 describe the path the system undergoes during  the poling procedure.
Figure S2 shows the multiple trials of the poling procedure followed by a second-harmonic  resistivity measurement.
Same measurements were repeated three times each with Hp > 0, Jp < 0  (antiparallel poling, shown in red) and with Hp > 0, Jp > 0 (parallel poling, shown in blue) for each  temperature (T = 4.2 K, 6.1 K, 8.0 K, 10.0 K).
In Figure 2E in the main text, the data showing a  large response in each of the following panels is selected and displayed.
In stark contrast to the manganese helimagnets[6, 7], the control with magnetic fields and electric  current appears to be ineffective in α-EuP3.
One possible reason for this is the small magnitude of  Jp.
|Jp| = 1×108 A/m2 applied here is close to the minimum value for successful chirality-control in  the case of manganese helimagnets[6, 7].
Another reason can be related to the orbital character of  the Fermi surface.
In the manganese metals, Mn 3d orbitals have a large density of states  contributing to the Fermi surface[S1], whereas in α-EuP3, the P-3p orbitals at the Fermi surface and  the Eu-4f states are only weakly hybridized[14], possibly resulting in a weaker momentum-transfer  between the electric current and the local moments during the poling procedure[22, S2, S3, S4].
Although in theory one can expect that a larger |Jp| should overcome the critical value and enable  chirality control, the sample temperature readily exceeds the Néel temperature from Joule heating,  limiting the parameter window to achieve controllability in α-EuP3.    Section 2.
Temperature dependence of ρ2ωasym – H and reproducibility of the nonreciprocal  response in a different FIB device  Figure S3 displays ρ2ωasym measured in a different FIB sample from the one discussed in the main  text.
The device is shown in panel A.
The electrode contacts were made by spot welding Au wires  on a crystal.
The crystal was then patterned into a Hall bar with a cross-sectional area of ~ 40 × 63    μm2 by using the FIB technique.
The temperature and magnetic field dependencies are quite similar  to those presented in the main text, which confirms the reproducibility.
The results from both  samples were used to plot the transition fields and the characteristic fields in Figure 1B and Figure  S7, respectively. Section 3.
Description of the bulk measurements  Figure S4 shows the crystal orientation and measurement configuration for the bulk transport  measurements presented in the main text.
The crystal orientation is displayed in panels A and B.  Electrode contacts were made by depositing 200 nm of Au on the sample.
The sample was fixed  on an oxidized single-crystal silicon wafer using varnish and Au wires were connected to the Au  electrodes using silver paste, as shown in panel C.
The magnetic field was applied perpendicular  to the sample, parallel to the crystalline a-axis.
Figures S5 and S6 show isotherms of the magnetic field dependence of magnetization and Hall  resistivity, respectively.
The low-field anomaly, denoted as B1 in Fig. 3, is more evidently observed  in the Hall effect rather than magnetization, indicating a Fermi-surface-related origin. Section 4.
Relationship between resistivity anomalies and magnetic phases  Figure S7 shows the magnetic phase diagram under μ0H // a in an extended temperature region  up to 20 K.
In addition to the information presented in Figure 1B, the following diagram displays  the low-field anomalies (shown in black) observed in Figure 3.
B1, B2, and B3 which were denoted  in Fig. 3 are denoted here as well.
As noted in the main text, one can see in Fig. S7 that the critical  points B1 and B2 observed in ρ2ωasym agree well with the peaks or kinks also seen in the longitudinal  and Hall resistivities and magnetization.
Although ρ2ωasym is limited only within the chiral phase, a characteristic feature about the B1- anomaly in the Hall resistivity extends into the PM region.
The peak structure seen in Fig. 3C,  although pronounced in the magnetically ordered phase, persists even in the PM region (Fig. S6).
The B1-anomaly throughout the whole temperature range is shown as a grey line in Fig. S7.
Notably,  the anomalies shown along the grey line correspond to the magnetization of 1.7 – 1.8 μB/Eu, which  is the critical value where the Fermi surface reconstruction has been reported previously[14]. Section 5.
First-principles calculations for the magnetic phases  Figure S8 shows the simplified models used in the electronic structure and density of states  calculations presented in Figure 4.4 The helimagnetic structure (Fig. S8A) was constructed based on the magnetic structure  determined for isostructural P-rich Eu(As1-xPx)3 (x = 0.80)[18].
The structure was slightly simplified  for computability by making it a commensurate structure and aligning the propagation vector  parallel to the a-axis, with components of q = (-0.75, 0, 0).
The conical structure (Fig. S8B) was then constructed by adding a component parallel to the a- axis and tilting the magnetic moments, corresponding to the experimentally applied magnetic field  direction.
The ferromagnetic structure (Fig. S8D) is an extrapolation of the conical model and  corresponds to the high-field limit where finally all the magnetic moments align parallel to the a- axis.
The fan structure (Fig. S8C) was constructed by setting the c*-axis component (c* // a × b, i.e.,  along the out-of-layer direction with respect to the layered crystal structure) to zero, resulting in a  net magnetic moment along the a-axis and an oscillating component in the b-axis. Section 6.
Magnitude of the nonreciprocal electronic transport in reported polar and chiral  systems The nonlinear resistivity in  -broken systems can be further described in detail as  ρ(B, j) = ρ0 ( 1 + γB⋅j + ⋅⋅⋅)  in chiral systems, and  ρ(B, j) = ρ0 [ 1 + γ(P×B)⋅j + ⋅⋅⋅],  in polar systems, where ρ0 is the linear (ordinary) resistivity at zero magnetic field and the second  term represents the directional nonlinear resistivity[8].
B is the magnetic flux density and P is a  unit vector parallel to the polarization vector.
This nonlinear nonreciprocal transport in systems  with broken   is named magnetochiral anisotropy (MCA)[9], and its magnitude can be  characterized by the value of the MCA coefficient γ.
In centrosymmetric systems, γ = 0, i.e., the  MCA vanishes.
Table S1 shows the comparison of the MCA magnitude among various  -broken systems.
Although the |γ| value tends to be smaller in magnetic systems compared to materials where the  crystal structure breaks  , centrosymmetric α-EuP3 exhibits MCA orders of magnitudes larger than  other magnetic metals, even larger than some of the materials with  -broken crystal structures.
The exquisite coupling between the magnetic texture and the semimetallic small Fermi surface may  be key in this observation, since a smaller Fermi energy will be closer in energy scale to the  magnetic coupling, favorable for the large band deformation by the magnetic moments and also its  detection via transport responses.5      Fig. S1.
Relation between the chirality-control procedure profile and magnetic phase diagram.
Diagram of the chirality-control (poling) procedure combining an external magnetic field Hp and a  dc electric current density Jp.
The poling procedure is denoted as a grey path traversing the magnetic  phases.
The temperature sweep is done by sweeping the dc electric current and utilizing the Joule  heating of the sample.
The inset schematic illustrates the experimental configuration for the parallel  poling (Hp > 0, Jp > 0) case.
”Poling” procedure  μ0H // a ≈ // q ρ-H, ρ-T, ρH-H (bulk)  M-H (bulk) Hp Jp Conical Fan PM6    Fig. S2.
Field-asymmetric component of the second-harmonic resistivity ρ2ωasym at various  temperatures.
Magnetic field dependence of ρ2ωasym after the poling procedures at (A) T = 4.2 K,  (B) 6.1 K, (C) 8.0 K, and (D) 10 K. The temperatures correspond to the helical/conical (4.2 K and  6.1 K), sinusoidal/fan (8.0 K), and paramagnetic (10 K) phases.
4.2 K 6.1 K 8.0 K 10 K A B C D Hp > 0, Jp < 0 Hp > 0, Jp > 07    Fig. S3.
Magnetic field dependence of ρ2ωasym measured in a different sample.
(A) SEM image of a  microfabricated sample.
(B) Isotherms of the magnetic field dependence of ρ2ωasym measured in the  microfabricated sample shown in (A).
5.12 K 5.32 K 5.66 K 6.33 K 6.68 K 7.14 K 7.50 K 4.83 K 4.62 K B A 100 μm8    Fig. S4.
Resistivity measurement configuration on a bulk sample.
Photographs of the sample used for  bulk resistivity measurements.
(A) and (B) display the crystal orientation obtained from single  crystal x-ray analysis.
(C) shows the resistivity measurement configuration.
a a* c b c* c* a b 0.1 mm 0.1 mm 0.1 mm μ0H // a A B C9    Fig. S5.
Magnetic field dependence of magnetization.
(A)-(F) show the magnetic field dependence of the  magnetization and its field derivative at various temperatures up to 20 K measured in a bulk sample.
T = 5.0 K 6.0 K 7.0 K 8.0 K 10.0 K 20.0 K A B C D E F 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T)10    Fig. S6.
Magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistivity.
(A)-(J) Magnetic field dependence of the Hall  resistivity at various temperatures up to 20 K measured in a bulk sample.
0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) 0 1 2 3 4 μ0H (T) T = 5.0 K 6.1 K 7.0 K 7.9 K 9.0 K A B C D E 10.0 K 20.0 K 12.0 K 15.0 K 17.0 K F G H I J11    Fig. S7.
Magnetic phase diagram and resistivity anomalies.
Field-temperature phase diagram of α-EuP3  for a magnetic field μ0H // a, along with the Hall resistivity anomalies shown up to T = 20 K. B1,  B2, and B3 denotes the magnetic fields where the anomalies and phase transitions occur as shown  in Figure 3.
B 1 B 2 B 3 ≈ //  μ0H // a q ρ-H, ρ-T, ρH-H (bulk) M-H (bulk) ρ2ω-H (FIB) M ~ 1.7-1.8 μB/Eu12    Fig. S8.
Simplified magnetic models assuming a propagation vector of q = (-0.75, 0, 0).
Arrangement  of the Eu moments in the (A) helimagnetic model, (B) conical model, (C) fan model, and (D)  ferromagnetic model.
Panel B shows the case for 3 μB/ Eu as one example for the conical structure.
Only Eu ions are depicted in the top panels for simplicity.
A Helical model <ma> = 0 μB/Eu B Conical model <ma> = 3 μB/Eu C Fan model <ma> = 5 μB/Eu D FM model <ma> = 7 μB/Eu13      Table S1.
List of the magnetochiral anisotropy coefficient γ for various published materials.
TSM and  RT stand for topological semimetal and room temperature, respectively.
Note that there is a detailed  discussion regarding the  -breaking in ZrTe5[S5].
Material |γ| (m2T-1A-1) Crystal structure  Note  Reference  ZrTe5  4 × 10-7  Polar  TSM, T = 3 K [S5]  WTe2  3.4 × 10-7  Polar  TSM, T = 5 K  [S6]  BiTeBr   3 × 10−12   Polar   T = 2 K [13] Te  10-8  Chiral  RT [S7]  CrNb3S6  10-12  Chiral  Magnetic, T = 90 K [5]  MnSi  2 × 10−13  Chiral  Magnetic, T = 35 K [4]  MnP  4 × 10−13  Centrosymmetric  Magnetic, T = 51 K [6]  MnAu2  2 × 10−14  Centrosymmetric  Magnetic, RT [7]  α-EuP3  6 × 10-11  Centrosymmetric Magnetic, T = 4.2 K This work14    SI References    S1.
A. Yanase, A. Hasegawa, Electronic structure of MnP. J. Phys.
C: Solid State Phys. 13,  1989 (1980). S2.
J. Xiao, A. Zangwill, M. D. Stiles, Macrospin models of spin transfer dynamics.
Phys.  Rev. B 72, 014446 (2005). S3.
O. Wessely, B. Skubic, L. Nordström, Spin-transfer torque in helical spin-density waves. Phys.
Rev. B 79, 104433 (2009). S4.
V. V. Ustinov, I. A. Yasyulevich, Chirality-dependent spin-transfer torque and current- induced spin rotation in helimagnets. Phys.
Rev. B 106, 064417 (2022). S5.
Y. Wang, H. F. Legg, T. Bömerich, J. Park, S. Biesenkamp, A. A. Taskin, M. Braden, A.  Rosch, Y. Ando, Gigantic Magnetochiral Anisotropy in the Topological Semimetal  ZrTe5. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 176602 (2022). S6.
T. Yokouchi, Y. Ikeda, T. Morimoto, Y. Shiomi, Giant Magnetochiral Anisotropy in  Weyl Semimetal WTe2 Induced by Diverging Berry Curvature. Phys. Rev. Lett.
130,  136301 (2023). S7.
G. L. J. A. Rikken, N. Avarvari, Strong electrical magnetochiral anisotropy in tellurium. Phys.
Rev. B 99, 245153 (2019).