1    Ultrafast generation and decay of a surface metal  L. Gierster1,2*, S. Vempati1,3, and J. Stähler1,2   1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Abt.
Physikalische Chemie, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin,  Germany  2Humbolt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Chemie, Brook-Taylor-Str. 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany  3Present address: Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Raipur-492015, India  *corresponding author    Abstract  Band bending at semiconductor surfaces induced by chemical doping or electric fields can create  metallic surfaces with properties not found in the bulk, such as high electron mobility, magnetism  or superconductivity.
Optical generation of such metallic surfaces via BB on ultrafast timescales  would facilitate a drastic manipulation of the conduction, magnetic and optical properties of  semiconductors for high-speed electronics.
Here, we demonstrate the ultrafast generation of a  metal at the (10-10) surface of ZnO upon photoexcitation.
Compared to hitherto known ultrafast  photoinduced semiconductor-to-metal transitions that occur in the bulk of inorganic  semiconductors, the metallization of the ZnO surface is launched by 3-4 orders of magnitude lower  photon fluxes.
Using time- and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, we show that the phase  transition is caused by photoinduced downward surface band bending due to photodepletion of  donor-type deep surface defects.
At low photon flux, surface-confined excitons are formed.
Above  a critical exciton density, a Mott transition occurs, leading to a partially filled metallic band below  the equilibrium Fermi energy.
This process is in analogy to chemical doping of semiconductor  surfaces.
The discovered mechanism is not material-specific and presents a general route for  controlling metallicity confined to semiconductor interfaces on ultrafast timescales.
Introduction  When the doping density of shallow donors is increased above a critical value in a semiconductor, the  excess electrons, originally localized in hydrogenic potentials at impurity sites, delocalize and form a  metallic band1.
Remarkably, this Mott or Mott-Anderson transition happens already at low doping  densities, for example at parts per 104 atoms in phosphorous-doped silicon1.
Semiconductor-to-metal  transitions (SMTs) also occur in two dimensions at semiconductor surfaces leading to the formation of  two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs)2.
In the case of oxide surfaces, 2DEG formation is often caused  by surface doping with shallow donor defects such as oxygen vacancies3,4 or adsorbates as, for  instance, hydrogen5,6.
The positively charged impurity sites modify the surface potential, causing  downward surface band bending (BB) of the conduction and valence band (CB and VB, respectively).
At low doping density, the BB is concentrated around isolated electron pockets at the surface6,7.2    Electron delocalization occurs above a critical electron density only2.
2DEGs have attracted  considerable interest in the past years, since, beyond metallicity, they can host phenomena such as  magnetism or superconductivity8,9.
Beyond chemical doping, metal-like properties of semiconductors can also be generated by optical  excitation.
At low photoexcitation densities the optical and electronic response of semiconductors is  dominated by non-interacting free carriers and excitons.
In contrast, strong photoexcitation can lead  to metal-like behavior by three different mechanisms:   1.
At a critical excitation fluence a Mott transition between free excitons occurs, leading to the  formation of an electron-hole plasma with quasi-Fermi levels in the CB and VB10,11.
This SMT  is closely related to the above described Mott-Anderson transition12.
In this case, the material  may exhibit metal-like optical properties and conductivities; however, without a change of  the equilibrium band structure, there is no density of states around the equilibrium Fermi  level EF and no true SMT has occurred. 2.
A real SMT can be achieved by photoinduced changes to the electronic band structure for  instance due to strong carrier-lattice or carrier-carrier interactions that change the screening  of the Coulomb interaction13–15.
Yet, in the case of inorganic semiconductors, strong laser  excitation (mJ/cm2) is necessary to drive such photoinduced phase transition (PIPT), as in the  famous room temperature PIPT in vanadium dioxide16–19.
Moreover, due to the high energy  uptake, the SMT usually becomes thermally stabilized, and the recovery of the equilibrium  phase is limited by thermal dissipation processes of nanosecond duration20. 3.
Analogous to chemical doping, the band structure can also be optically manipulated by  photodoping21–23.
One pathway is the photoexcitation of deep donors, which creates electron- hole pairs bound in hydrogenic potentials, with the hole localized at the impurity site, see the  left hand side of the illustration in Fig. 1c.
In contrast to free excitons, these defect excitons  are fixed in space, forming a direct analogue to the shallow donors discussed above24.
As for  chemical dopants, the geometric confinement of the photoholes at the surface modifies the  surface potential, thereby causing local downward BB.
At a critical density of such states, a  metallic band is formed (Fig. 1c), leading to surface metallization.
Photoinduced metallization by defect excitons was, so far, only observed on very long time  scales in the bulk of semiconductors25, exploiting the effect that the photodoping can be  metastable.
This leads to persistent photoconductivity, as observed in various  semiconductors25,26.
Amongst them is the wide band gap (3.4 eV), intrinsically n-doped (EF ca.  0.2 eV below the CB) semiconductor ZnO, which has a variety of native deep donor defects  leading to a broad photoluminescence signal below the fundamental band gap energy27,28.
For  ZnO, a photoinduced, ultrafast control of the conduction properties would be especially3    appealing, as any application would benefit from the ease of nanostructuring and  transparency to visible light of this material29,30.
At semiconductor surfaces, the  photoexcitation of defects would imitate the effect of the gate terminal in field effect  transistors.
Such phototransistors could then be used for the control of ultrafast currents in  information technology or optoelectronic devices, such as light emitters in the teraherz  regime31.
In this article, we unveil an ultrafast photoinduced SMT confined to the surface of ZnO using very low  excitation fluences with sub-ns decay and feasible up to at least 256 K. This dramatic effect is enabled  by photodoping of the surface: depopulation of deeply bound in-gap (defect) states induces transient  local downward BB and populates the CB with electrons.
Above a threshold fluence of only  13.6 J/cm2, the photoexcited electrons delocalize in a non-equilibrium state that shows all defining  footprints of a metal: Density of states around the equilibrium Fermi energy EF resulting from a partially  filled dispersive band and an electron distribution following Fermi-Dirac statistics that thermalizes with  the lattice within 200 fs.
We track the PIPT in the time domain by monitoring the photodoped electron  density, the nearly-free electron mass of the surface electrons, and the energy shift of the VB.
Generation and decay of the surface metal occur on the timescales of electronic screening and  electron-hole recombination, respectively.
The carrier density of the surface metal shows the same  build-up and decay dynamics as the downward shift of the VB that occurs upon positive charging of  the surface by photoexcitation due to photodoping.
Moreover, the effective mass evolves as a function  of laser fluence with a critical form as expected for the Mott SMT between shallow donor dopands.
Remarkably, the ultrafast photoinduced SMT does not require photoinduced changes to the band  structure beyond surface BB; a sufficiently large number of deep donor levels should enable similar  effects at the surfaces of many semiconductors.
Results  Photostationary n-type doping.
We use time- and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy  (trARPES) to monitor the PIPT.
A pump-probe scheme, where a first femtosecond laser pulse (pump)  excites the sample and a second one (probe) photoemits the non-equilibrium electronic population,  allows for the measurement of the ultrafast dynamics.
We apply this to a ZnO sample of (10-10)  orientation cleaned in ultrahigh vacuum (cf. Methods).
Before discussing the ultrafast metallization  dynamics, it is important to ascertain the semiconducting initial state.
Therefore, we first investigate  the sample without applied pump laser pulse.
Photoelectron spectra from the VB, similar to those  reported in Ref.32, identify the VB maximum at -3.2 eV with respect to EF.
This indicates an n-doped  sample with the equilibrium Fermi energy 0.2 eV below the CB as is typical for ZnO28,33.
In order to  address the energetic region around EF, we use probe laser pulses with h = 6.3 eV (energy level4    diagram in Fig. 1c).
This energetic region is interesting, because the electronic structure around EF  defines the conduction properties.
For an undoped semiconductor no states in the forbidden gap are  expected, while doping with shallow donors below the Mott density induces localized and hence  dispersionless states just below EF6,34.
Fig. 1a shows that such states exists at the Fermi level, centered  at -0.1 eV below EF and exhibiting a width of several hundred meV. An angle-resolved spectrum in Fig. 1b shows that the feature is also dispersionless, indicative of isolated shallow donor dopants.
Beyond chemical doping, shallow dopands could result from photoexcitation of deep defects as  outlined in the introduction if their lifetime is sufficiently long to be pumped and probed by two  subsequent laser pulses provided by our laser system (200 kHz ≙ 5 s).
As the luminescence of defect  excitons in ZnO is known to extend to the s regime27, formation of such photostationary state of long- lived defect excitons would actually be expected.
We test this hypothesis by tuning the repetition rate  of our laser system from normally 200 kHz down to 5 kHz, which varies the separation of two  subsequent laser pulses from 5 s to 200 s.
As displayed in the inset of Fig. 1a, the photoelectron  intensity drops by almost 50 %, showing that a photostationary state is at the origin of the shallow  donor signal.
The detailed properties of this photostationary state population are out of the scope of  the present publication and will be discussed elsewhere35.
We conclude that the dispersionless feature  at -0.1 eV below EF results from photostationary defect excitons that act like shallow donors.
We will  demonstrate in the following that photoinduced enhancement of the defect exciton and, thus, shallow  donor density can lead to metallization of the ZnO surface exclusively on femto- to picosecond  timescales after optical excitation. The ultrafast PIPT.
In order to drive the ultrafast SMT we excite the sample resonantly with the band gap (hpump = 3.43 eV)  and monitor the photoinduced dynamics with time-delayed (t) probe pulses (hprobe = 6.3 eV).
With  this pump photon energy, it is possible to drive optical transitions across the gap as well as transitions  from occupied in-gap states to the CB.
Fig. 1d shows the evolution of the PE intensity as a function of  t and energy with respect to EF.
The photoresponse of the sample is characterized by a large PE signal  below the equilibrium EF, which arises immediately after time zero and persists for several hundred ps.
A video of the angle-resolved spectra as a function of t gives an impression of the process (available  as supplemental material).
The angular distribution of the photoelectron intensity, averaged from  4-8 ps, is shown in Fig. 1f.
It exhibits a broad feature of few 100 meV width, which is cut by EF and  shows a curvature, to the eye most apparent at low energies.
We can extract the curvature by fitting  the data with a Gaussian peak multiplied by a Fermi-Dirac distribution (other methods give the same  result, see Supplementary Fig. 1).
The peak positions describe a parabola with meff = 1.2(1) me, i.e. the5    band nearly exhibits the free electron mass me.
Thus, at small positive delays, ZnO shows all defining  characteristics of a metal: a dispersive band, cut by the equilibrium EF, indicative of a SMT.
To further confirm the above finding we analyze the angle-integrated PE spectra in the first ps after  excitation (Fig. 1e).
The excitation of metals with fs laser pulses initially leads to a heating of the  electronic subsystem and a subsequent equilibration with the phonon bath within the first ps36.
Photoexcited ZnO behaves analogously to photoexcited metals: The spectra exhibit a characteristic  change of the high energy tail around EF which can be described by a Fermi-Dirac distribution with a  delay-dependent temperature (data and fits in Fig. 1e, cf. Methods).
The resulting time-dependent  electronic temperature is plotted in the inset of Fig. 1e.
Starting at 1300 K, it decays due to equilibration  with the lattice within approx. 200 fs.
The photoinduced phase thus shows electron-electron and  electron-phonon interaction as expected for a metal.
To quantify the temporal evolution of the PIPT, we spectrally integrate the photoinduced electron  signal below EF (purple), which is proportional to the electron density in the metallic band, and plot its  time dependence together with the evolution of the band curvature 1/meff (green markers) in Fig. 2a.
Electron density and curvature of the metallic band show a two-fold build-up (1 = 20(20) fs,  2 = 1.20(15) ps), which is followed by a decay on a timescale of hundreds of ps (3 = 219(13) ps); see  Methods for details on the fitting.
As localized states are dispersionless, the rise of the curvature 1/meff  can be viewed as dynamic delocalization of the photoexcited electrons and the subsequent decrease  of 1/meff during the decay as dynamic localization37.
The degree of localization is correlated with the  photoexcited electron density.
We conclude that the free electron-like metal is generated abruptly  within the experimental resolution on the time scale of electronic screening11,38 and decays on a sub- nanosecond timescale.
It should be noted that the photostationary population of shallow donors discussed in the previous  section spectrally overlaps with the metallic band.
It seems highly likely that the reduction of the  surface electron density, accompanied by the dynamic localization, eventually funnels into the  localized photostationary population, as discussed later in more detail.
In order to determine the threshold fluence of the PIPT, we tune the excitation fluence across a wide  range, from few to tens of J/cm2.
Fig. 2b shows the curvature 1/meff as a function of fluence.
Below  the threshold fluence of Fc = 13.6 J/cm2, the pump laser pulse induces an electron population below  EF with a flat angular distribution (Supplementary Fig. 2 a,b), as observed for excitons38 and also  reminiscent of the photostationary response resulting from long-lived defect excitons as discussed  above.
Also no cooling of a hot thermalized electron population is observed below Fc (Supplementary  Fig. 2 f,g).
Thus, low fluence photoexcitation creates a localized, non-interacting electron population.
Above Fc, 1/meff increases monotonously and, simultaneously, the hot electron cooling indicative of  the metallic phase starts developing (Supplementary Fig. 2 h-j).
We find meff = 0.7 me for the highest6    fluence in our experiment.
In order to test whether the effective mass can be viewed as an order  parameter of this phase transition, we fit the data in Fig. 2b using the inverse of  𝑚𝑒𝑓𝑓= 𝐴 (𝐹−𝐹𝐶)−𝛼+ 𝑚0      (1)  where A is a proportionality constant, the critical exponent and m0 an offset.
The fit coincides with  the data.
Such critical behavior is predicted from the Mott-Hubbard theory of the Mott SMT39 and has  been observed experimentally upon chemical doping in three40 as well as in two dimensions41.
Remarkably, we observe this trend after photoexcitation in the ultrafast time domain, which suggests  that photoexcitation indeed acts like chemical doping already on femtosecond timescales.
It should be  noted that at high doping density the effective mass of the metallic band would be expected to reach  the CB meff42.
This is confirmed by fixing FC to 13.6 J/cm2, resulting in m0 = 0.2(6) me, which is in  agreement with the CB effective mass of 0.25 me43.
The surface photodoping mechanism.
We showed that a photoinduced SMT occurs in ZnO.
At low  fluence, the excited carriers do not interact beyond exciton formation, which is also in agreement with  earlier work on weakly photoexcited ZnO surfaces44.
Above FC, a transient metal phase is generated.
The behaviour of the effective mass as a function of pump laser fluence is consistent with a Mott  transition, either of free or defect excitons.
Such a transition also explains the dynamic change of the  effective mass during delocalization (at increasing exciton density) and subsequent localization (at  decreasing exciton density).
A crucial aspect of the photoinduced metal phase is that the quasi-EF in the metallic band equals the  equilibrium EF for all excitation densities (cf. Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 2).
This means that the SMT  goes beyond a Mott transition between free excitons without changes to the equilibrium electronic  band structure: The exciton binding energy in ZnO is 60 meV, which is not enough to create a state at  the Fermi level, as the equilibrium EF is located 200 meV below the bulk CB.
Thus, at low fluence, no  electronic states below EF can arise due to free excitons.
Likewise, above the Mott density, the free  electron-like population in the CB would be 200 meV above EF.
Photoexcitation must therefore change  the equilibrium band structure.
This could be reached, for instance, via band gap renormalization (BGR)  due to carrier-carrier screening10.
BGR would shift the CB downward, and at the same time the VB  would move upward45.
However, also photodoping with defect excitons could lead to electron energies  below those expected for free excitons if the doping was confined to the surface: The depopulation of  surface defects would result in positive surface charges.
This modification of the surface potential leads  to local downward BB toward the surface, in analogy to chemical doping of semiconductor surfaces.
Such local downward BB can reach several hundred meV below the Mott limit, as shown for ZnO doped  with hydrogen5,6.
In the case of photodoping, contrary to BGR, the VB should shift downward.7 In order to distinguish the BGR and the surface photodoping scenario, we determine the energetic  position of the VB upon photoexcitation.
A probe photon energy of hprobe= 4.25 eV gives access to the  VB in a two-photon photoemission process (see the inset in Fig 3a).
A pump laser fluence above the  SMT threshold FC is used.
Fig. 3b compares a VB spectrum at negative delays (black) to one at a positive  pump-probe delay of few ps (red).
Clearly, the VB is transiently shifted to lower energies.
The false  color plot in Fig. 3a shows that the downward shift occurs abruptly and persists for several hundred ps.
Based on this, we exclude BGR as the driving mechanism and conclude that the depopulation of deep  defects at the ZnO surface lies at the origin of the PIPT.
It should be noted that BGR most likely still  occurs, contributing to the downward shift of the CB.
However, the downward shift of the VB shows  that the dominant process affecting the electronic band structure is photoinduced surface BB.
Note  that the VB shift is not entirely rigid but that the peak also appears broadened and has a lower  amplitude (Fig. 3b).
This observation is consistent with surface BB, where not all probed unit cells along  the surface normal exhibit the same shift, as noted previously for chemical doping46.
Due this averaging  effect it is impossible to quantifiy the maximum BB at the very surface46.
Still, the observed VB position  is a qualitative marker of downward BB due to positive surface charging.
Beyond monitoring band positions, trARPES offers another direct way of probing that the surface is  indeed positively charged after photoexcitation: As shown previously for GaAs47, a change of the  surface charge leads to a short-range electrostatic field that extends into the near-surface vacuum  region.
In a pump-probe experiment, photoelectrons emitted by the probe laser pulse are decelerated  by this pump-induced field at small negative pump-probe delays t < 0, when the photoelectrons are  still close to the surface47.
As discussed in great detail by Yang et al.47, this effect leads to a downward  shift of the energetic position of the detected probe electrons as a function of negative pump-probe  delay.
The shift is strongest close to time zero and gets weaker at larger negative pump-probe  delays47,48.
In our experiment, the data in Fig. 1d clearly shows that such a downward shift of the  photostationary state signal probed by hprobe = 6.3 eV occurs for t < 0 on a 100 ps timescale.
The  downward shift at negative delays unambiguously demonstrates that the surface is positively charged  due to photoexcitation by the pump laser pulse.
Note that such photoinduced changes of the surface  charge and the resulting change of surface BB are well-known as surface photovoltage phenomena49.
Both, increase and decrease of BB have been demonstrated in the ultrafast time domain50.
The final link between the depopulation of deep defects at the ZnO surface and the SMT is given in Fig. 2a, where we compare the VB downward shift as a function of t (black markers) to the time- dependent electron density in the metallic band (XC, purple markers) obtained under the same  excitation conditions.
As evidenced by a global fit (blue curve), both transients agree perfectly for all  time scales, from ultrafast (abrupt and delayed) rise to decay.
We conclude that the surface is  photodoped by the photoexcitation of deep defects.
Thereby, the pump laser pulse populates the CB8    with electrons and creates localized positive charges at the surface that induce downward BB (Fig. 3c).
At low pump laser fluence, surface-confined defect excitons are formed and the downward band  bending is local.
Upon crossing FC, a Mott transition occurs and a metallic band at the surface arises  (Fig. 1c).
Downward BB causes the formation of electronic states in both, the excitonic as well as the  surface metal phase, below the equilibrium EF.
Energetic position and chemical origin of the deep defect levels.
The question about the energetic  position and chemical nature of the unexcited deep defect states in the ZnO band gap remains.
We  address the former by varying the pump photon energy.
Photoexcitation will charge the surface  positively and lead to the SMT only if the pump photon energy is sufficient to excite electrons from  deep donor levels to normally unoccupied states.
By tuning the pump photon energy below the  fundamental gap of 3.4 eV28 we can exclusively address in-gap states.
As before, the energetic position  of the VB in the time domain unveils whether the surface is charged positively by photoexcitation.
Fig. 3d shows that downward BB is still induced by photoexcitation with hpump = 3.2 eV (full width half  maximum: 0.1 eV).
This unambiguously confirms that, downward BB, and hence the PIPT, is not driven  by excitations across the ZnO band gap (3.4 eV).
Complementarily, Fig. 3e demonstrates that  photoexcitation with hpump = 3.0 eV does not induce downward surface BB, i.e. this photon energy is  not sufficient to depopulate the relevant defect states.
This shows that in-gap states responsible for  the SMT must lie deeply in the band gap, closer than 0.4 eV above the VB maximum.
Note that, likely  due to the close proximity to the high density of states of the VB maximum, no separate peak due to  the deep defects can be detected in the photoemission data.
The experimental spectra only exhibit a  strongly broadened VB edge (Fig. 3b).
Defects could be produced at the ZnO surface due to the surface cleaning procedure, which involves  annealing in ultrahigh vacuum (cf. methods).
The only native defects ZnO that have a low formation  energy and form an occupied state deep in the band gap are lattice vacancies, i.e. oxygen or zinc  vacancies28.
Both can be created during high temperature treatment as shown by mass  spectroscopy51,52.
However, zinc vacancies can be ruled out as they should be negatively charged in  thermodynamic equilibrium28.
Photoexcitation of such states would only diminish the number of  negative charges at the surface, and hence reduce existing upward BB instead of creating downward  BB.
In contrast, oxygen vacancies are neutral in equilibrium and induce a state 0.4 eV above the VB  maximum according to hybrid DFT calculations53, in close agreement with the photon energy  dependence reported above.
In order to test the hypothesis that annealing causes the deep defects, we varied the annealing  temperature and checked the influence on the photoinduced metallization dynamics.
As shown in  Fig. 4 the PE-intensity of the photoinduced metal phase is higher by a factor of 2-3 when the sample9    was annealed at 950 K compared to annealing at 750 K. This directly shows that the photoexcitation  by the pump laser pulse addresses states created during the annealing step at the ZnO surface.
The above observation compares well with previous work by Ref.
51, who found that oxygen vacancies  are formed above 700 K with increasing efficiency as the temperature is raised.
Hence, it seems likely  that oxygen vacancies cause the deep defect levels.
Discussion  The photodoping process and the associated time scales are illustrated in Fig.5.
Upon arrival, the pump  laser pulse depopulates deep donor defects at the surface and populates the CB with electrons  (process 1).
Subsequently, with 1 = 20(20) fs, downward surface BB  builds up, shifting the CB below  EF.
In the regime of low fluence photoexcitation by the pump laser pulse, localized electron pockets  are formed in proximity of the surface, and the BB is a local effect only6.
An electron bound to a charged  impurity site is part of a defect exciton.
This is conceptually identical to a shallow donor dopant.
Above  the critical photoexcitation fluence Fc = 13.6 J/cm2, a Mott transition occurs: The CB electrons,  originally localized at the defect centers, delocalize and generate the surface metal phase.
This  delocalization (decreasing meff) occurs simultaneously with the band structure change on a time scale  of electronic screening.
After the abrupt laser excitation, the downward shift of the VB, the electron density of the surface  metal, and the degree of delocalization increase further with 2 = 1.20(15) ps.
We interpret this as hole  trapping at surface defect sites (process 2), which enhances the photodoping density at the surface.
Consequently, the surface is charged even more positively, which leads to an increase in surface BB.
A  resolution-limited upper boundary of 80 ps for this process was recently identified by X-ray absorption  spectroscopy54 and few-ps time constants were determined by optical spectroscopy27.
However, we  note that hole polaron formation55 may result in similar dynamics.
Eventually, part of the CB electrons recombine with the surface defects and, as the doping density is  reduced, the remaining electrons localize (increasing meff) with 3 = 219(13) ps (process 3).
This back- transition to the semiconducting state is at least one order of magnitude faster than, for example, the  decay of the photoinduced SMT in VO220.
A fraction of the remaining defect excitons has a lifetime that  exceeds the inverse repetition rate of our laser system.
They lead to the photostationary n-type doping  of the surface and appear as the shallow donor signal at negative delays.
Interestingly, the above processes do not require cryogenic temperatures: The PIPT can be realized  between 100 K up to at least 256 K, i.e. close to room temperature (Supplementary Fig. 3).
In summary, we unveiled a photoinduced ultrafast SMT at the surface of ZnO with a verylow threshold  fluence.
The mechanism is simple and universal: Photodepletion of in-gap states (deep donors) causes  photodoping of the surface, which leads to local downward BB and eventually a partially filled metallic10    band below EF.
All our experimental observations are consistent with this mechanism, from positive  surface charging and downward BB that occurs simultaneously with the SMT, to the (dynamic)  delocalization of the surface electrons.
The same mechanism should lead to PIPTs at surfaces or  interfaces of other semiconductors with a sufficiently high density of donor-type deep surface defects.
Beyond technological implementations of ZnO as an ultrafast, transparent photoswitch with the  transient properties of an equilibrium metal, this work is the starting point for studies of 2DEGs with  emerging properties beyond metallicity in the ultrafast time domain.
Methods   Sample preparation.
The ZnO(10-10) sample was purchased from MaTeck GmbH and is prepared by  repeated cycles of Ar+-sputtering (0.75 keV, 8 A) succeeded by 30 min annealing in ultra-high vacuum  (Tmax = 950 K, heating rate 30-40 K min-1).
The surface cleanliness is confirmed by LEED and  photoemission measurements of the work function.
trARPES measurements.
Photoemission measurements are performed in situ using a hemispherical  electron energy analyzer (PHOISBOS 100, Specs GmbH).
A bias voltage of 1.5 eV is applied with respect  to the sample.
The EF reference is taken from the gold sample holder, which is in electrical contact with  the sample surface.
Pump and probe laser pulses are generated from a regenerative amplifier system  running at 200 kHz and several optical parametric amplifiers (OPAs) working at 200 kHz (PHAROS,  internal OPA, Orpheus-2H, Orpheus-3H by Light Conversion).
6.3 eV laser pulses are reached by  frequency quadrupling of the 1.55 eV output of the internal NOPA.
Pump pulses with 3.2-3.4 eV and  probe pulses with 4.25 eV are created in the Orpheus-2H and 3H, respectively.
All measurements  shown in the main text are performed at 100 K.  Fit functions.
The fit functions for extracting the time constants (Fig. 2a) consists of a double  exponential rise and a single exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian peak representing the cross  correlation of pump and probe laser pulses.
The latter is determined from high energy cuts in the ZnO  pump-probe data in case of using 6.3 eV as probe photon energy, yielding a cross correlation width of  115(17) fs (full width half maximum).
In the case of using 4.25 eV as probe photon energy, the cross  correlation is measured in situ by pump-probe photoemission from a tantalum sheet yielding 71(1) fs  (full width half maximum).
The rise and decay time constants are the result of a global fit to the PE  intensity around EF and to the VB shift, as shown in Fig. 2a.
The time resolution in the experiments is  limited by the accuracy of determining the pump-probe cross correlation that is used for the  convolution.
The fit function to extract the electronic temperature of the metallic state is a Gaussian peak multiplied  by a Fermi-Dirac distribution, convolved with a Gaussian peak accounting for the energy resolution of  the experiment (50 meV).11      References    1.  Mott, N. Metal-Insulator Transitions.
Taylor & Francis Ltd, London (1974).
2.  Abrahams, E., Kravchenko, S. V. & Sarachik, M. P. Colloquium: Metallic behavior and related  phenomena in two dimensions. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 73, 251–266 (2001).
3.  Meevasana, W. et al. Creation and control of a two-dimensional electron liquid at the bare  SrTiO3 surface. Nat. Mater. 10, 114–118 (2011).
4.  Rödel, T. C. et al. High-density two-dimensional electron system induced by oxygen vacancies  in ZnO. Phys. Rev. Mater.
2, 051601(R) (2018).
5.  Ozawa, K. & Mase, K. Metallization of ZnO (10-10) by adsorption of hydrogen, methanol, and  water: Angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 81, 205322 (2010).
6.  Deinert, J.-C., Hofmann, O. T., Meyer, M., Rinke, P. & Stähler, J. Local aspects of hydrogen- induced metallization of the ZnO(10-10) surface. Phys.
Rev. B 91, 235313 (2015).
7.  Stähler, J. & Rinke, P. Global and local aspects of the surface potential landscape for energy  level alignment at organic-ZnO interfaces. Chem.
Phys. 486, 149–165 (2016). 8.
Hwang, H. Y. et al. Emergent phenomena at oxide interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11, 103–113 (2012).
9.  Caviglia, A. D. et al. Electric field control of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface ground state.
Nature  456, 624–627 (2008). 10.
Chernikov, A., Ruppert, C., Hill, H. M., Rigosi, A. F. & Heinz, T. F. Population inversion and giant  bandgap renormalization in atomically thin WS2 layers. Nat.
Photonics 9, 466–470 (2015). 11.
Huber, R. et al. How many-particle interactions develop after ultrafast excitation of an  electron-hole plasma.
Nature 414, 286–289 (2001). 12.
Guerci, D., Capone, M. & Fabrizio, M. Exciton Mott transition revisited. Phys. Rev. Mater. 3,  054605 (2019). 13.
Giannetti, C. et al. Ultrafast optical spectroscopy of strongly correlated materials and high- temperature superconductors: a non-equilibrium approach. Adv.
Phys. 65, 58–238 (2016). 14.
Basov, D. N., Averitt, R. D., Van Der Marel, D., Dressel, M. & Haule, K. Electrodynamics of  correlated electron materials. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 83, 471–541 (2011). 15.
Huang, L., Callan, J. P., Glezer, E. N. & Mazur, E. GaAs under Intense Ultrafast Excitation :  Response of the Dielectric Function. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1 (1998). 16.
Cavalleri, A. et al. Femtosecond Structural Dynamics in VO2 during an Ultrafast Solid-Solid  Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 23 (2001).
17.  Wall, S. et al. Ultrafast disordering of vanadium dimers in photoexcited VO2.
Science 362, 572– 576 (2018). 18.
Morrison, V. R. et al. A photoinduced metal-like phase of monoclinic VO2 revealed by ultrafast  electron diffraction.
Science 346, (2014). 19.
Wegkamp, D. & Stähler, J. Ultrafast dynamics during the photoinduced phase transition in  VO2. Prog. Surf.
Sci. 90, 464–502 (2015).12    20.
Wen, H. et al. Structural and electronic recovery pathways of a photoexcited ultrathin VO2  film. Phys.
Rev. B 88, 165424 (2013). 21.
Iwai, S. et al. Ultrafast Optical Switching to a Metallic State by Photoinduced Mott Transition  in a Halogen-Bridged Nickel-Chain Compound. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 5 (2003). 22.
Stojchevska, L. et al. Ultrafast Switching to a Stable Hidden Quantum State in an Electronic  Crystal.
Science 344, 177–180 (2014). 23.
Yu, G., Lee, C. H., Heeger, A. J., Herron, N. & McCarron, E. M. Transient photoinduced  conductivity in single crystals of YBa2Cu3O6.3: Photodoping to the metallic state. Phys. Rev.  Lett.
67, 2581–2584 (1991). 24.
Zhang, Y. Electronic structures of impurities and point defects in semiconductors. Chinese  Phys.
B 27, 117103 (2018). 25.
Katsumoto, S., Komori, F., Sano, N. & Kobayashi, S. Fine Tuning of Metal-Insulator Transition  in Al0.3Ga0.7As Using Persistent Photoconductivity. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 56, 7 (1987). 26.
Lany, S. & Zunger, A. Anion vacancies as a source of persistent photoconductivity in II-VI and  chalcopyrite semiconductors. Phys.
Rev. B 72, 035215 (2005).
27.  Foglia, L. et al. Revealing the competing contributions of charge carriers , excitons , and  defects to the non-equilibrium optical properties of ZnO. Struct.
Dyn. 6, 034501 (2019). 28.
Janotti, A. & Van De Walle, C. G. Fundamentals of zinc oxide as a semiconductor. Reports  Prog.
Phys. 72, 126501 (2009). 29.
Klingshirn, C., Meyer, B., Waag, A., Hoffmann, A. & Geurts, J. Zinc Oxide - From Fundamental  Properties Towards Novel Applications.
Springer Series in Materials Science (2010). 30.
Huang, M. H. et al. Room-temperature ultraviolet nanowire nanolasers.
Science 292, 1897– 1899 (2001). 31.
Charipar, N. A., Kim, H., Mathews, S. A. & Piqué, A. Broadband terahertz generation using the  semiconductor-metal transition in VO2.
AIP Adv. 6, 015113 (2016).
32.  Deinert, J.-C. Zinc Oxide Surfaces and Interfaces : Electronic Structure and Dynamics of Excited  States: PhD Thesis. (2016). 33.
Ozawa, K., Sawada, K., Shirotori, Y. & Edamoto, K. Angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy  study of the anion-derived dangling-bond band on ZnO(10-10). Phys.
Rev. B 68, 125417  (2003). 34.
Xu, H. C. et al. Direct observation of the bandwidth control Mott transition in the NiS2 -X Sex  multiband system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 087603 (2014). 35.
Gierster, L., Vempati, S. & Stähler, J. (in preparation). 36.
Lisowski, M. et al. Ultra-fast dynamics of electron thermalization, cooling and transport  effects in Ru(001). Appl. Phys.
A 78, 165–176 (2004). 37.
King, S. B., Broch, K., Demling, A. & Stähler, J. Multistep and multiscale electron transfer and  localization dynamics at a model electrolyte/metal interface. J. Chem.
Phys. 150, 041702  (2019). 38.
Cui, X. et al. Transient excitons at metal surfaces. Nat.
Phys. 10, 505–509 (2014). 39.
Brinkman, W. F. & Rice, T. M. Application of Gutzwiller’s variational method to the metal- insulator transition. Phys.
Rev. B 2, 10 (1970).13    40.
Tokura, Y. et al. Filling dependence of electronic properties on the verge of metal–Mott- insulator transition in Sr1-xLaxTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 14 (1993). 41.
Casey, A., Patel, H., Nyéki, J., Cowan, B. P. & Saunders, J. Evidence for a Mott-Hubbard  Transition in a Two-Dimensional 3He Fluid Monolayer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 11 (2003). 42.
Liu, S. et al. Thermal activation of carriers from a metallic impurity band. Phys.
Rev. B 48, 15  (1993). 43.
Yan, Q. et al. Band parameters and strain effects in ZnO and group-III nitrides. Semicond.
Sci.  Technol. 26, 014037 (2011).
44.  Deinert, J.-C. et al. Ultrafast Exciton Formation at the ZnO (10-10) Surface. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 057602 (2014). 45.
Liu, F., Ziffer, M. E., Hansen, K. R., Wang, J. & Zhu, X. Direct Determination of Band-Gap  Renormalization in the Photoexcited Monolayer MoS2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 246803 (2019). 46.
McKeown Walker, S. et al. Control of a Two-Dimensional Electron Gas on SrTiO3 (111) by  Atomic Oxygen.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 177601 (2014).
47.  Yang, S. L., Sobota, J. A., Kirchmann, P. S. & Shen, Z. X. Electron propagation from a photo- excited surface: Implications for time-resolved photoemission. Appl. Phys.
A 116, 85–90  (2014).
48.  Tanaka, S. I. Utility and constraint on the use of pump-probe photoelectron spectroscopy for  detecting time-resolved surface photovoltage.
J. Electron Spectros. Relat.
Phenomena 185,  152–158 (2012). 49.
Kronik, L. & Shapira, Y. Surface photovoltage phenomena: theory, experiments and  applications. Surf.
Sci. Rep. 37, 1–206 (1999). 50.
Rettig, L., Kirchmann, P. S. & Bovensiepen, U. Ultrafast dynamics of occupied quantum well  states in Pb/Si(111).
New J. Phys. 14, 023047 (2012). 51.
Göpel, W. & Lampe, U. Influence of defects on the electronic structure of zinc oxide surfaces. Phys.
Rev. B 22, 12 (1980). 52.
Göpel, W. Oxygen interaction of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric ZnO prismatic  surfaces. Surf.
Sci. 62, 165–182 (1977).
53.  Patterson, C. H. Role of defects in ferromagnetism in Zn1-xCoxO: A hybrid density-functional  study. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 74, 144432 (2006). 54.
Penfold, T. J. et al. Revealing hole trapping in zinc oxide nanoparticles by time-resolved X-ray  spectroscopy. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–9 (2018). 55.
Sezen, H. et al. Evidence for photogenerated intermediate hole polarons in ZnO. Nat. Commun. 6, 6901 (2015).
Acknowledgements Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research  Foundation) - Project-ID 182087777 - SFB 951.
S.V. would like to thank the Max Planck Research Society  for a Max Planck Postdoctoral Fellowship.
Author contributions L.G. and S.V. did the experiments, L.G. analyzed the data.
L.G. and J.S. wrote the  manuscript.
J.S. guided the work.
All authors contributed to discussions.
Data availability A minimal data set (source data for Fig. 1b,d,e,f, Fig. 2a, Fig. 3a,b) to reproduce the  main findings of the present study is deposited in the Zenodo repository with the identifier  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4421027.
All other data analysed during the current study is available  from the corresponding author on reasonable request.14    Additional information Supplementary material is available for this paper.
Correspondence and  requests for materials should be addressed to L.G. (e-mail: gierster@fhi-berlin.mpg.de).
Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Figure 1 Time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy of the ZnO(10-10) surface upon resonant excitation.
a, Angle-integrated  photoelectron (PE) spectra recorded with hProbe = 6.3 eV with the pump laser pulse hPump = 3.43 eV off or at negative pump- probe delays t.
Inset: Repetition rate dependency of the signal.
The dashed line is a guide to the eye. b, Angle-resolved PE  spectrum at negative pump-probe delays showing a dispersionless feature.
Black dots: Peak maximum of the intensity  distribution.
c, Energy level diagram and illustration of the discussed surface metal generation due to the photoexcitation of  deep defects at the ZnO surface.
Negative delays: Photodoped semiconductor due to long-lived defect excitons.
Small positive  delays: Formation of a metallic band.
d, Temporal evolution of the PE-intensity in false colors as a function of pump-probe  delay t and energy.
Pump laser fluence: 27 J/cm2.
The pump pulse induces an abrupt increase of the electron density below  EF.
The purple box (XC) indicates the energy-integration window for the evaluation shown in Fig. 2. e, Normalized, angle- integrated PE-intensity for different positive delays (50 to 800 fs) with Fermi-Dirac distribution fits (solid lines).
Inset:  Electronic temperature versus t.
Error bars represent standard deviations.
f, Angle-resolved PE-intensity averaged from  4 to 8 ps showing a dispersive free electron-like band.15      Figure 2 Dynamics and fluence dependence of surface metallization.
a, Purple: PE-intensity below EF (proportional to the  surface electron density).
The energy-integration window is indicated by the purple box (XC) in Fig. 1d.
Green: Curvature of  the metallic band (inverse effective mass meff, determination see Supplementary Fig. 1).
Black: VB peak position  (determination see Fig. 3).
The blue line is a global fit (see Methods).
Grey area: Instrument response function.
b, Fluence- dependent evolution of the band curvature.
Red solid line: Fit with the critical form, equation (1).
Error bars in a and b  respresent standard deviations.
Figure 3 Downward shift of the VB upon resonant and below band gap excitation.
a, PE-intensity from the VB in false colors  as a function of pump-probe delay probed with hprobe= 4.25 eV. This photon energy is below the work function of the sample  (=4.4 eV) and the VB is accessed by two-photon photoemission, see the energy sketch in the inset.
The pump photon energy  is 3.43 eV at a fluence of 27 J/cm2.
Markers: peak positions, determination see b. b, Comparison of VB spectra at negative  delays (black) and at positive delays (red).
Top: Raw data (vertically offset for clarity).
Bottom: Data after subtracting the  background of secondary electrons.
Blue: Gaussian fits to determine the peak maximum.
c, Energy level diagram with a sketch  of downward surface BB along the surface normal z. d, e VB spectra at negative (black) and positive delays (red) for different  pump photon energies below the fundamental gap.16      Figure 4 Sensitivity of the photoresponse to the surface conditions.
PE-spectra recorded with hprobe= 6.3 eV and  hpump = 3.4 eV (fluence 140 J/cm2) at a pump-probe delay of 5 ps using two different annealing temperatures during the  sample preparation (cf. methods and see text).
The same fluence of pump as well as probe laser pulses is used for both shown  spectra, hence the absolute PE-intensity can be compared.
After annealing at 750 K (blue), the photoelectron intensity of the  pump-induced metal phase is by a factor of 2-3 smaller than after annealing at 950 K (red).
Figure 5 Scheme of the pump-induced processes.
Photoexcitation resonant to the ZnO band gap populates the CB and  depopulates surface defect states leading to downward surface BB; above the threshold fluence FC the electrons delocalize  and form the metal phase (process 1).
Delayed increase of the BB occurs due to hole trapping at surface defect sites  (process 2).
The PIPT recovers as the surface charge is reduced by electron-hole recombination (process 3).17    Supplementary Figures for  Ultrafast generation and decay of a surface metal  L. Gierster1,2*, S. Vempati1,3, and J. Stähler1,2   1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Abt.
Physikalische Chemie, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin,  Germany  2Humbolt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Chemie, Brook-Taylor-Str. 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany  3Present address: Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Raipur-492015, India  *corresponding author          Supplementary Figure 1 Different evaluations of the angular distribution of the photoresponse.
a, Angular distribution at a  delay of 6 ± 2 ps after resonant photoexcitation with a fluence of 27 J/cm2.
Blue: Peak positions from fitting energy  distribution curves at different kII (e.g. EDC 1, EDC 2 as indicated with the blue/purple boxes) with a Gaussian peak multiplied  by a Fermi-Dirac distribution and convolved with another Gaussian peak to account for the energy resolution (50 meV).
Fits  to exemplary spectra are shown in b. Green: Peak maximum of the EDC, red: position of the low energy edge half maximum,  numerically determined, as shown in b.
The black lines in a are fits with E(kII)=E0 + ħ2kII2/(2meff); meff = 1.2(1) me (blue), meff =  1.7(5) me (green) and meff = 1.8(3) me (red).
c, Comparison of the curvature for different fluences; error bars represent  standard deviations.
Blue: Evaluation from fitting.
Green and red: evaluation by determining the half maximum numerically.
For the green data points the background at negative delays was subtracted.
For low fluences smaller than the PIPT threshold,  the background has to be subtracted in order to identify the (localized) character of the excitation, because the photoinduced  change is small.
Clearly, independent of the evaluation method, we find a free-electron-like band with positive curvature and  that the curvature increases as a function of photodoping.18      Supplementary Figure 2 Fluence dependence of the photoinduced response.
a-e, Angular distribution of the pump- induced change at 6±2 ps below and above the PIPT threshold FC (13.6 J/cm2).
The photostationary signal is subtracted to  show the low fluence response.
Below FC , the pump laser pulse induces a non-dispersive state below EF.
Above FC , a  dispersive band evolves, with increasing bandwidth and curvature.
For all fluences, the band is cut by the equilibrium Fermi  level.
f-k, Corresponding angle-integrated PE-spectra (log. scale, normalized) for different pump-probe delays (50 fs to  800 fs).
Below FC, all spectra are identical.
Above FC the high energy tail shows cooling of a hot electron population by  equilibration with the lattice, characteristic for photoexcited metals.
The delay dependence is described by Fermi-Dirac  distributions with varying temperatures (see non-log.
scale data with Fermi-Dirac distribution fits in the inset in k).19      Supplementary Figure 3 Temperature dependence of the photoresponse.
a-c, Angle-resolved photoinduced photoelectron  intensity distribution at 97, 188 and 256 K, respectively, recorded with a pump photon energy of hPump = 3.43 eV and a probe  photon energy of hProbe = 6.3 eV. The pump fluence is above the threshold fluence FC.
The displayed photoelectron intensity  is averaged across pump-probe delays between 3 and 10 ps.
All angle-resolved spectra show a free electron-like band.
d-f,  Corresponding angle-integrated spectra exhibit the cooling of a hot electron population within the first ps, characteristic for  the surface metal phase.
The inset of f shows that, after equilibration with the lattice at a late pump-probe delay of 6 ± 2 ps,  the electron (lattice) temperature also increases with the sample temperature (analysis as described in Methods).
This shows  that the photoinduced SMT works at least up to 256 K.