1    Temperature-controlled interlayer exchange coupling in strong/weak ferromagnetic  multilayers: a thermo-magnetic Curie-switch    A. Kravets1,2, A. N. Timoshevskii2, B. Z. Yanchitsky2, M. Bergmann1, J. Buhler1, S. Andersson1,  and V. Korenivski1  1Nanostructure Physics, Royal Institute of Technology, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden  2Institute of Magnetism, National Academy of Science, 03142 Kiev, Ukraine2    We investigate a novel type of interlayer exchange coupling based on driving a  strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic tri-layer through the Curie point of the weakly  ferromagnetic spacer, with the exchange coupling between the strongly ferromagnetic outer  layers that can be switched, on and off, or varied continuously in magnitude by controlling the  temperature of the material.
We use Ni-Cu alloy of varied composition as the spacer material  and model the effects of proximity-induced magnetism and the interlayer exchange coupling  through the spacer from first principles, taking into account not only thermal spin-disorder but  also the dependence of the atomic moment of Ni on the nearest-neighbor concentration of the  non-magnetic Cu.
We propose and demonstrate a gradient-composition spacer, with a lower  Ni-concentration at the interfaces, for greatly improved effective-exchange uniformity and  significantly improved thermo-magnetic switching in the structure.
The reported magnetic  multilayer materials can form the base for a variety of novel magnetic devices, such as sensors,  oscillators, and memory elements based on thermo-magnetic Curie-switching in the device.
Interlayer exchange coupling is one of the key fundamental characteristics of magnetic multilayers [1, 2], important for such large scale industrial applications as field sensors, magnetic recording, and  magnetic random access memory [3-6].
In many cases it controls the magnetization switching in the  system under the influence of external fields [7] or spin-polarized currents [8-10].
The oscillatory  interlayer exchange coupling (RKKY) [11-13] is due to the conduction electrons mediating the spin  transfer between the ferromagnetic layers, and is fixed in fabrication to be positive or negative in  magnitude by selecting a suitable thickness of the nonmagnetic metal spacer.
Once the coupling is set  to antiparallel, an external switching field is necessary to change the state of the structure to parallel.
It is highly desirable to design multilayer materials where the interlayer exchange coupling is not  fixed but rather controllable, on and off, by varying an external physical parameter, such as3    temperature.
One such system is strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic sandwich (F/f/F) where the  weakly ferromagnetic spacer (f) has a lower Curie temperature (TC) than that of the strong  ferromagnetic outer layers (F) [14,15].
Heating the structure through the TC of the spacer exchange- decouples the outer magnetic layers, so their parallel alignment below TC can be switched to  antiparallel above TC.
This switching is fully reversible on cooling through the TC, as the number of  thermal magnons is reduced and the exchange spring in the spacer, aligning the outer F-layers,  becomes stronger.
This action can provide a spin switch or oscillator with intrinsic thermo-electronic  control by the Joule heating of a transport current through the structure.
The key element in such an F/f/F sandwich is the weakly ferromagnetic spacer f, which should  have a tunable in fabrication but well defined in operation TC and, preferably, a narrow ferromagnetic  (f) to paramagnetic (P) transition.
Diluted ferromagnetic alloys, such as Ni-Cu, with the TC in the  bulk known to be easily tunable to near room temperature [16, 17] is the natural choice for the spacer  material.
However, the effects of thermal disorder on the magnetization and exchange coupling in  thin-film multilayers are practically unexplored.
In particular, the strong exchange at an F/P interface  should be expected to suppress the thermal magnons in the spacer, driving the para-to-ferromagnetic  transition due to the magnetic proximity effect [18,19], thereby resulting in a gradient of the effective  magnetization and interatomic exchange in the spacer [20,21], as well as critically affecting the  interlayer exchange coupling through the spacer.
In this work we indeed find a pronounced  ferromagnetic proximity effect at F/f(P) interfaces as well as propose and demonstrate experimentally  a gradient spacer design (f*/f/f*), which significantly improves the thermo-magnetic switching  behavior of the multilayer material and makes it attractive for technological applications.
Our choice for the diluted ferromagnetic alloy to be used as the spacer material is Ni-Cu.
It is  considered to be a well known system, at least in the bulk [16,17].
Our recent detailed studies of4    sputter-deposited Ni-Cu films confirmed the known general properties, but also revealed some  pecular properties, such as exchange-induced phase separation at high Ni concentration x, above 70%  of atomic Ni corresponding to the Curie temperature range above 100º C [22].
In this work, the  concenration range of interest is x(Ni)≤70%, corresponding to the TC range of 100º C and below.
In  fact, the Ni-Cu concentrations with x<50% are non-magnetic at all temperatures in the bulk [16,17]  or thick films [23].
The situation is quite different in thin film multilayers, as we show below.
Figure 1 shows the saturation magnetization of 60 nm thick NixCu100-x films of varied composition,  deposited at ambient temperature by dc magnetron sputtering on oxidized Si substrates, normalized  to the saturation magnetization of pure Ni.
The magnetization vanishes at room temperature for x≈62  at.%, where the Ni-Cu becomes paramagnetic in the bulk limit (here single-layer, 60 nm thick).
Figure 1 also shows the saturation magnetization measured at 100º C, which vanishes at x≈70%.
The  ratio of the magnetization at these two temperatures, shown by the blue symbols in Fig. 1, has a sharp  step at 70-74% Ni, indicating the optimum composition interval for exploiting the ferro-to- paramagnetic transition in the Ni-Cu alloy.
We show, however, that this composition range must be  significantly shifted to lower effective concentrations, if the Ni-Cu spacers are to be used for sharp  on/off thermal switching in thin-film multilayers.
Perhaps the most informative way to investigate the properties of thin spacers as it relates to the  interlayer exchange is to integrate them into a spin-valve type structure, AF/F/f/F, where one of the  outer strongly ferromagnetic layers is pinned by an antiferromagnet (AF), and study the  coupling/decoupling of the outer ferromagnetic layers (F) as a function of the spacer composition,  thickness, and temperature.
The method is not direct as to measuring the magnetization of the spacer,  but is very sensitive and direct when it comes to the inter-layer exchange interaction of interest.
Our  material system is a Permalloy-clad spacer, with one of the Permalloy (Py) layers exchange-pinned to5    antiferromagnetic IrMn.
Specifically, Ir20Mn80(12 nm)/Co90Fe10(2 nm)/Ni80Fe20(2 nm)/NixCu100-x(t  nm)/Ni80Fe20(6 nm), henceforth Fpin/NixCu100-x(t nm)/F.  Figure 2 shows the key magnetic parameters of the Fpin/NixCu100-x(t nm)/F structures, measured at  room temperature.
Figure 2a shows magnetization loops for the NixCu100-x spacer thickness of 6 nm  and x varied in the range from 0 to 72 at.%.
For low Ni concentrations (x<35%), due to the absence  of any significant magnetic coupling between the free and pinned F layers through the spacer, the  magnetization loop consists of two well-separated transitions at approximately zero field and -480 Oe  (Fig 2a, green), corresponding to switching of the free Py layer and the pinned ferromagnetic layer,  respectively.
With increasing Ni-concentration past x≈35%, the minor and major loops begin to  merge (Fig. 2a, blue), indicating the onset of exchange coupling between the free and pinned outer  layers.
The middle points of the two magnetization transitions (minor and major) define the two  exchange fields, Hex1 and Hex2, respectively.
As the spacer becomes fully non-magnetic at low Ni- concentrations and does not mediate any exchange coupling, the unpinned Py layer becomes free to  switch and Hex1→0, while Hex2 characterizes solely the strength of the AF-pining of the other  ferromagnetic layer.
Already at x≈52%, the two transitions merge significantly, indicating a  substantial exchange coupling across the spacer.
Interestingly, the x=52% composition for a single- layer Ni-Cu is non-magnetic (paramagnetic) at room temperature (TC~10 K) and normally would not  be expected to exchange couple the outer F-layers.
These data indicate that a ferromagnetic order of  significant strength is induced in the paramagnetic spacer on rather long length scales, several  nanometers in this case.
This induced ferromagnetism couples the outer layers, bringing together the  two magnetic transitions, such that Hex1 and Hex2 merge.
Thus, for this geometry, Hex1 is a direct  measure of the interlayer exchange coupling, while Hex2 additionally reflects the strength of the  antiferromagnetic pinning.
For x>70%, a composition ferromagnetic at room temperature in the bulk,6    the minor and major loops merge into one (Fig. 2a, red).
Fine-stepping through the low-concentration  range, illustrated by the minor loops in Fig. 2b, shows that the onset of the interlayer exchange  indeed is at x≈35%, which is due to the vanishing Ni atomic magnetic moment in the Cu matrix, as  detailed below.
The dependence of the two exchange fields, Hex1 and Hex2, on the Ni-concentration in a 6 nm thick  Ni-Cu spacer is shown in Fig. 2c.
The free and pinned ferromagnetic layers are fully decoupled up to  x=35% (red symbols), at which point Hex1 begins to increase in magnitude, first slightly and then  substantially above x=50%, even though the spacer is still intrinsically paramagnetic at this  concentration.
At x≈70% the two exchange fields merge into one, which is expected since the spacer  is intrinsically ferromagnetic at 70% at RT.
Fig. 2d shows the thickness dependence of the exchange fields for a nominally (in the bulk)  paramagnetic spacer composition of x=56%.
One can see that at 3 nm thickness the outer  ferromagnetic layers are fully coupled and behave as one.
For this composition, the interlayer  exchange vanishes at approximately 9 nm in the spacer thickness.
This is much greater that the  interatomic spacing normally associated with direct exchange and indicates that the characteristic  length scale for the induced ferromagnetic proximity effect under study is dictated by another  mechanism, namely, thermally disordered lattice spins in the spacer by short-wave spin-waves on  length scales of at least several lattice units.
In order to understand the mechanism involved as well as optimize the performance of the material  we develop a full model of the F/f(P)/F multilayer from first principles, which takes into account the  thermal spin disorder as well as the effect of Cu-dilution on the atomic magnetic moment of Ni in the  performance-critical spacer layer.7    Our model system is a Ni/Ni-Cu/Ni three-layer, in which the diluted magnetic alloy spacer is  enclosed by bulk-like fcc Ni [001] (for making the calculations time efficient; qualitatively same  behavior is obtained with Permalloy outer layers).
Both Ni and Cu atoms in the three-layer structure  occupy the sites of the fcc lattice, and are distributed randomly within each monolayer in the spacer.
The number of atomic monolayers in the spacer is denoted by Nf.
The atomic concentration of Ni in i- th monolayer is denoted by ci.
The Ni atoms interact magnetically by the standard isotropic  Heisenberg interaction.
Cu-Cu and Ni-Cu exchange interactions are neglected since the magnetic  moment of Cu is negligible (Cu does not polarize in Ni).
The local atomic magnetic moment of Ni,  mloc(z), is a function of the number of the nearest neighbor Ni atoms, z.
For obtaining the effective  (measurable) magnetic characteristics of the structure we use the mean field model and take the  average Ni-magnetic moment to be the same within one monolayer, mi=m(zi).
The effective magnetic  field is [24]: i j i j i j i j j H J n c m     ,  where the sum is over monolayers, Ji  – the Ni-Ni exchange interaction, and ni – the coordination  number.
The magnetization at a given temperature T is given by [24]: mi=L(miHi/kBT), where L(x) is  the Langevin function and kB – the Boltzmann constant.
The unknown exchange integrals Ji were obtained for 2 coordination spheres of the fcc lattice.
In  this the total energies of 3 superstructures of fcc Ni were calculated for the ferro- (F), antiferro- (AF),  and antiferro-double (AFD) [25] types of magnetic ordering.
With the magnetic energy in the Heisenberg form and assuming the magnetic moment of Ni  independent of its direction, the following expressions for the exchange interaction are obtained:  J1=(EF-EAF)/8; J2=(EF+EAF-2EAFD)/4, where EF, EAF, and EAFD are the full energies of the  superstructures.8    The total energies of the structures were obtained using DFT approach and the Wien2k FLAPW  code [26].
The GGA exchange-correlation potential was the same as in Ref. 27.
The radius of the  MT-spheres was 2.2 atomic length units.
The electron density was computed for 63 k-points in the  irreducible parts of the first Brillouin zone.
The obtained exchange integrals were: J1=-6.15 meV and  J2=-17.01 meV.   For obtaining the mloc(z) dependence, the electronic structure of three special quasi-random  superstructures [28], which model random bulk Ni-Cu alloy, were calculated.
The stoichiometries of  the structures were: Ni25Cu75, Ni50Cu50, and Ni75Cu25.
Figure 3a (solid circles) shows the values of  mloc calculated by the FLAPW method.
For calibration purposes, the slope of the Curie temperature  of bulk Ni-Cu alloy was calculated and agreed well with the experiment [17], as shown in the inset to  Fig. 3a.
The interesting result in the obtained mloc(z) is that Ni becomes essentially nonmagnetic in  the Ni-Cu alloy at concentration of approximately 30%-Ni.
This has important implications for  optimizing the spacer material, as discussed below.
The key for efficient operation of a spin-thermo-electronic F/f/F valve is a small width of its Curie  transition.
The green line in Fig. 3b shows the calculated magnetization per Ni atom of bulk Ni80Cu20  alloy.
The blue curve shows the temperature dependence of the magnetization of a homogeneous Ni- Cu spacer with Ni outer layers.
The spacer consists of 38 monolayers (approx.
7 nm) and is placed  between outer planes of fcc Ni.
At T=0K the magnetization is equal to the local moment of the Ni  atom mloc for this composition (Fig. 3a).
When the spacer is enclosed by strongly ferromagnetic outer  electrodes (Ni), the spacer’s ferromagnetic state greatly extends in temperature, vanishing completely  only above 0.9 TC (Ni) (Fig. 3b, blue).
This means that the outer electrodes are strongly exchange- coupled at the nominal TC of the spacer alloy (0.58), marked as the inflection point, Mt (Tt).
The  effective transition extends over a broad interval of 0.3-0.4 TC(Ni) above the effective transition point9    of 0.58.
The reason for this extended transition is the strong ferromagnetic order induced in the  spacer in proximity to the interfaces, as shown by the open symbols in Fig. 3c, for two characteristic  temperatures.
At Tt the moment at the interface is enhanced 4-fold compared to that in the center of  the spacer, with a strong variation in the effective TC across the thickness.
The proximity length is an  order of magnitude greater than the atomic spacing, so the induced magnetization penetrates through  all of the spacer thickness.
The result is non-zero magnetic exchange between the outer ferromagnetic  layers, well above the intrinsic Curie point of the spacer material.
This proximity effect should be  universal for F/f/F tri-layers and sets a fundamental limitation on the width of the Curie transition of  the weak ferromagnet incorporated in the multilayer.
It is highly desirable for device applications to narrow the magnetic transition in the spacer.
Using  the above detailed understanding of the highly non-uniform magnetization profile at the F/f interface,  we have designed a gradient-spacer, in which the magnetic-atom concentration is reduced at the  interfaces.
This efficiently suppresses the proximity effect and makes the magnetization distribution  much more uniform, as shown in Fig. 3c with solid symbols for a gradient spacer with the interface  Ni concentration reduced from 80% to 65%.
This change in the spacer layout has a dramatic effect on the simulated transition width, as shown  in Fig. 3b (red).
The magnetization at the inflection point is 5 times smaller for the uniform-spacer  design, which translates into an order of magnitude sharper Curie transition for the tri-layer,  comparable in width with that in the ideal spacer (uniform, bulk-like; green in Fig. 3b).
In order to experimentally demonstrate the gradient-spacer effect proposed above, we have  fabricated a range of valves, in which the spacer itself had a tri-layer structure, f*/f/f*, with the buffer  layers f* of different thickness and Ni-content compared to the inner spacer layer f.
The inner layer f  had a fixed thickness and concentration of 6 nm and 72%, respectively.
This new layout is illustrated10    in the inset to Fig. 4, which shows the phase map of the resulting proximity effect.
The vertical scale  gives the thickness of the buffer layer f* for a given concentration and temperature, at which the  outer Py layers fully decouple, determined in the same fashion as in Figs. 2.
The phase map thus  gives the operating area for a Curie-valve based of the gradient-spacer design.
Interestingly, the scaling is logarithmic and shows that the thinnest layers decouple only below  x=30%, where the Ni atoms become, in fact, nonmagnetic.
We believe that this finding has high  relevance for the RKKY interaction in this system in the thin-spacer limit studied previously [29, 30].
The RKKY interlayer coupling through thin Cu spacers was interpreted to withstand paramagnetic Ni  impurities up to approximately 35% Ni, vanishing at higher concentrations.
We suggest that the  mechanism behind the strong RKKY and its subsequent vanishing at higher Ni-content was instead  the loss of the atomic moment on Ni below 30% Ni in Cu, detailed in our simulation results above  (Fig. 3a).
Having established the key physical parameters of the new gradient spacer design, below we  demonstrate its greatly improved thermo-electronic characteristics.
Figure 5 compares the  temperature dependence of the magnetization of the two spacer layouts, with uniform and gradient- type composition.
The samples were heated to 100 ºC (to just above the bulk- TC of the inner spacer  material, but below any significant reduction in the AF pinning), after which a reversing field of 50  Oe was applied in order to switch the free Py layer, and the temperature was gradually decreased to  room temperature while the magnetization was recorded.
As a result, the spacer acts as an exchange  spring of increasing strength, which rotates the free Py layer during the cooling.
The Curie transition (para-to-ferromagnetic) is very broad in the uniform-spacer multilayer.
In fact,  the rotation of the free layer is far from complete at 100º C, even for the relatively thick spacer (20  nm), due to the residual proximity-induced interlayer exchange.
In stark contrast, the gradient-spacer11    sample fully exchange-decouples into the antiparallel state of the outer Py layers at 90 ºC (the Curie  point of the inner spacer material with x=72%), and has a sharp transition into the parallel state of the  multilayer at RT.
The 20-80% width of the transition is approximately 20 degrees, same as the full- width-at-half-maximum width, and several times narrower than that for the uniform spacer.
This  result is in good agreement with the theoretically predicted behavior.
It is informative to note that the thermo-magnetic switching demonstrated herein can have  significant advantages over the recently developed and very promising thermally-assisted switching,  used in the memory technology, based on thermally controlling antiferromagnetic exchange pinning  [31].
One advantage is the the Curie point of a diluted ferromagnet can be easily varied in the desired  range and is not fixed to the Neel (or blocking) temperature of the antiferromagnet.
Furthermore, the  ferro-to-paramagnetic transition typically is fully reversible, does not involve spin “blocking”, and  therefore should not suffer from training effects present at the exchange-biased F/AF interface.
In conclusion, we have investigated strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic tri-layers where the  interlayer exchange coupling is controlled by driving the material through the Curie point of the  spacer.
The resulting exchange coupling between the strongly ferromagnetic outer layers can be  switched on and off, or varied continuously in magnitude by controlling the temperature of the  material.
This effect is explained theoretically as due to induced ferromagnetism at F/f(P) interfaces.
It is shown that the atomic magnetic moment and the effective interatomic exchange coupling are  highly non-uniform throughout the spacer thickness, especially in the proximity to the strongly  ferromagnetic interfaces.
This critically affects the interlayer exchange coupling and the ability to  control it thermo-electronically.
We have proposed and demonstrated a new, gradient-type spacer,  having a significantly narrower Curie transition and distinct thermo-magnetic switching.
The12    demonstrated multilayer material can form the base for a variety of novel magnetic devices based on  spin-thermo-electronic switching.
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from EU-FP7-FET-Open through project Spin- Thermo-Electronics.
Figure captions:  1.
Saturation magnetization of thick NixCu100-x alloy films normalized to that of pure Ni, as a  function of Ni content, measured at room temperature (RT) and 100º C.
The solid lines are  guides to the eye.
Blue symbols show the ratio of the magnetization at the two temperatures,  which becomes zero at the boundary of the thermo-magnetic operating region.
2. (a) Magnetization loops of Fpin/NixCu100-x(6 nm)/F tri-layers having 35, 52 and 70 Ni at.%  content.
The exchange fields, Hex1 and Hex2, for the free and pinned ferromagnetic layers are  defined as the midpoints of the respective transitions.
(b) Magnetization minor loops of  Fpin/NixCu100-x(6 nm)/F tri-layers with different Ni-Cu spacer compositions.
Exchange fields of  the two outer ferromagnetic layers versus (c) nickel concentration in a 6 nm thick Ni-Cu spacer  and (d) thickness of the Ni-Cu spacer for x=56 at.%.
The solid lines are guides to the eye. 3.
(a) Calculated local atomic magnetic moment of Ni atoms in NixCu100-x alloy as a function of  the number of the Ni atoms in the first coordination sphere, normalized to the moment of bulk  fcc Ni of m0(Ni)=0.63µB.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
Inset shows the calculated and  experimental [17] slopes of TC in the bulk.
(b) Calculated magnetization per nickel atom versus  temperature for a bulk Ni80Cu20 alloy (green), uniform Ni80Cu20(7 nm) spacer (blue) and a  gradient composition spacer Ni65Cu35(1 nm)/Ni84Cu16(5 nm)/ Ni65Cu35(1 nm) (red), the spacers  enclosed by outer Ni layers.
The inflection points, where the transition is steepest as defined by  the second derivative changing sign, are marked with Mt(Tt).
(c) Calculated magnetization13    profiles in a uniform Ni80Cu20(38 ML) (open symbols) and gradient Ni65Cu35(4 ML)/  Ni84Cu16(30 ML)/ Ni65Cu35(4 ML) (solid symbols) composition spacers for two different  temperatures near the respective Curie points. 4.
Thickness of the interfacial buffer layer f* of the weakly ferromagnetic spacer at which the  outer Py layers decouple, as a function of its Ni-content, for room temperature and 100º C. The  thickness and Ni-concentration of the inner spacer layer f are 6 nm and 72 at.%, respectively. 5.
Magnetization of two uniform Ni72Cu28 spacer multilayers, with 10 nm (us1) and 20 nm (us2)  thick spacers, and of a gradient Ni50Cu50(4 nm)/Ni72Cu28(6 nm)/Ni50Cu50(4 nm) spacer  multilayer (gs), normalized for a direct comparison.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
The  arrows in the illustrations of the right panel show the respective relative orientations of the  magnetic moments in the center of the individual layers of the exchange coupled F/f/F  multilayer.14    References [1] S. S. P. Parkin.
Systematic variation of the strength and oscillation period of indirect magnetic exchange coupling  through the 3d, 4d, and sd transition metals. Phys. Rev. Lett.
67, 3598-3601 (1991).
[2] A. Fert, P. Grünberg, A. Barthélémy, F. Petroff, and W. Zinn.
Layered magnetic structures: interlayer exchange  coupling and giant magnetoresistance. J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
140-144, 1-8 (1995). [3] G. A. Prinz. Magnetoelectronics.
Science 282, 1660-1663 (1998). [4] U. Hartmann.
Magnetic multilayers and giant magnetoresistance: fundamentals and industrial applications; Springer:  Berlin, Germany, 1999. [5] P. Grünberg.
Layered magnetic structures: history, highlights, applications. Phys.
Today 54, 31-37 (2001).
[6] C. Chappert, A. Fert, and F. Nguyen Van Dau.
The emergence of spin electronics in data storage nature materials. Nature Mater. 6, 813-823 (2007). [7] J. M. Daughton. GMR applications. J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 192, 334-342 (1999).
[8] J. S. Slonczewski.
Current-driven excitation of magnetic multilayers. J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 159, L1–L7 (1996).
[9] E. B. Myers, D. C. Ralph, J. A. Katine, R. N. Louie, and R. A. Buhrman.
Current-induced switching of domains in  magnetic multilayer devices.
Science 285, 867-870 (1999).
[10] A. Brataas, A. D. Kent, and H. Ohno.
Current-induced torques in magnetic materials. Nature Mater. 11, 372 (2012).
[11] P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, M. B. Brodsky, and H. Sowers.
Layered magnetic structures: evidence for  antiferromagnetic coupling of Fe layers across Cr interlayers. Phys. Rev. Lett.
57, 2442-2445 (1986).
[12] G. Binasch, P. Grünberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn.
Enhanced magnetoresistance in Fe-Cr layered structures with  antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange. Phys.
Rev. B 39, 4828-4830 (1989).
[13] M. N. Baibich, J. M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen van Dau, F. Petroff, P. Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J.  Chazelas.
Giant magnetoresistance of (001)Fe/(001)Cr magnetic superlattices. Phys. Rev. Lett.
61, 2472-2475 (1988).
[14] S. Andersson and V. Korenivski.
Thermoelectrically controlled spin-switch. IEEE Trans.
Magn. 46, 2140-2143  (2010).
[15] A. M. Kadigrobov, S. Andersson, D. Radić, R. I. Shekhter, M. Jonson, and V. Korenivski.
Thermoelectrical  manipulation of nanomagnets. J. Appl. Phys. 107, 123706 (2010).
[16] C. G. Robbins, H. Claus, and P. A. Beck.
Magnetism in Ni-Cu alloys. Phys. Rev. Lett.
22, 1307-1310 (1969).
[17] D. J. Chakrabarti, D. E. Laughlin, S. W. Chen, and Y. A. Chang.
Cu-Ni (Copper - Nickel).
In Phase diagrams of  binary copper alloys, edited by P. Subramanian, D. Chakrabarti, and D. Laughlin (ASM International, Materials Park,  OH, 1994) pp. 276 – 286. [18] J. J. Hauser.
Magnetic proximity effect. Phys.
Rev. 187, 580-583 (1969).
[19] M. G. Samant, J. Stöhr, S. S. P. Parkin, G. A. Held, B. D. Hermsmeier, F. Herman, M. van Schilfgaarde, L.-C. Duda,  D. C. Mancini, N. Wassdahl, and R. Nakajima.
Induced spin polarization in Cu spacer layers in Co/Cu multilayers. Phys.  Rev. Lett.
72, 1112-1115 (1994).15 [20] N. García and A. Hernando.
Theory for coupling ferromagnets through paramagnetic layers: direct exchange  coupling plus a magnetic pump mechanism. J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
99, L12-L19 (1991) [21] I. Navarro, M. Ortuno, and A. Hernando.
Ferromagnetic interactions in nanostructured systems with two different  Curie temperatures. Phys.
Rev. B 53, 11656-11660 (1996).
[22] A. F. Kravets, A. N. Timoshevskii, B.Z. Yanchitsky, O.Yu.
Salyuk, S.O. Yablonovskii, S. Andersson, and V.  Korenivski.
Exchange-induced phase separation in Ni-Cu films. J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
324, 2131-2135 (2012).
[23] I. Bakonyi, E. Tóth-Kádár, J. Tóth, T. Becsei, T. Tarnóczi, and P. Kamasa.
Magnetic and electrical transport  properties of electrodeposited Ni-Cu alloys and and Ni81Cu19/Cu multilayers. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter.
11, 963-973  (1999).
[24] R. E. Camley and D. R. Tilley.
Phase transitions in magnetic superlattices. Phys.
Rev. B 37, 3413-3421 (1988).
[25] H. C. Herper, E. Hoffmann, and P. Entel.
Ab initio full-potential study of the structural and magnetic phase stability  of iron. Phys.
Rev. B 60, 3839-3848 (1999).
[26] P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G. Madsen, D. Kvasnicka, and J. Luitz.
WIEN2k, An augmented plane wave + local orbitals  program for calculating crystal properties (Karlheinz Schwarz, Techn.
Universität Wien, Austria), 2001.
ISBN 3- 9501031-1-2.
[27] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof.
Generalized gradient approximation made simple. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77,  3865-3868 (1996).
[28] S. L. Shang, Y. Wang, D. E. Kim, C. L. Zacherl, Y. Du, and Z. K. Liu.
Structural, vibrational, and thermodynamic  properties of ordered and disordered Ni1-xPtx alloys from first-principles calculations. Phys.
Rev. B 83, 144204 (2011).
[29] S. N. Okuno and K. Inomata.
Dependence on Fermi surface dimensions of oscillatory exchange coupling in Co/Cu1-x  Nix (110) multilayers. Phys. Rev. Lett.
70, 1711-1714 (1993).
[30] S. S. P. Parkin, C. Chappert, and F. Hermann.
Oscillatory exchange coupling and giant magnetoresistance via Cu-X  alloys (X=Au, Fe, Ni). Europhys.
Lett., 24, 71-76 (1993).
[31] I. L. Prejbeanu, M. Kerekes, R. C. Sousa, H. Sibuet, O. Redon, B. Dieny, and J. P. Nozières.
Thermally assisted  MRAM. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter.
19, 165218 (2007).FIG. 1FIG 2.FIG. 3FIG. 4FIG. 5