arXiv:cond-mat/0405280v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  13 May 2004 What is the real driving force of ion beam mixing?
P. S¨ule1, M. Menyh´ard1, K. Nordlund2 1 Research Institute for Technical Physics and Material Science, Konkoly Thege u. 29-33, Budapest, Hungary, sule@mfa.kfki.hu/www.mfa.kfki.hu/ sule 2 Accelerator Lab., Helsinki, Finland (November 8, 2018) Molecular dynamics simulations have been used to study the driving force of ion irradiation induced interfacial mixing in metal bilayers in which the relative mass of the constituents is considerable.
We ﬁnd no apparent eﬀect of chemical forces, such as heat of mixing or cohesive energy up to 8 keV ion energy, although a considerable number of liquid and high energy particles (hot atoms) persist up to even 20 ps during the thermal spike.
This result is in direct conﬂict with the widely accepted theory of thermal spike mixing (chemical interdiﬀusion model).
The supersaturation of vacancies also occurs and which induces a thermally activated intermixing of the lighter constituent of the bilayer.
The delay and the decoupling of the intermixing of the light constituent is explained as a backscattering eﬀect at the interface: the interface acts as a diﬀusional barrier for high energy particles due to the large diﬀerence in atomic masses.
The heavier atoms are predominantly ejected to the overlayer at the beginning of the thermal spike while the light atoms are injected to the bulk at the beginning of the cooling period (in Ti/Pt) or during the thermal spike with some time delay (Al/Pt).
PACS numbers: 79.20.Rf, 61.80.Az 61.80.Jh 61.82.Bg 61.80.Az Theory and models of radiation eﬀects 61.80.Jh Ion radiation eﬀects 61.82.-d Radiation eﬀects on speciﬁc materials 61.82.Bg Metals and alloys 66.30.-h Diﬀusion in solids (for surface and interface diﬀusion, see 68.35.Fx) 79.20.Rf Atomic, molecular, and ion beam impact and interactions with surfaces 81.40.Wx Radiation treatment (particle and electromagnetic) (see also 61.80.-x Physical radiation eﬀects, radiation damage) Keywords: Computer simulations, Ion-solid interaction, ion-beam mixing, molecular dynamics, mass eﬀect, interfacial mixing, atomic migration, amorphisation I. INTRODUCTION The rapid growth in the use of ion implantation and ion beam processing of materials in the semiconductor indus- try and elsewhere, such as ion-beam sputtering, cleaning, smoothing, depth proﬁling, etc.
[1], or global response of solids under irradiation (e.g. phase instability in driven alloys) [2,3], makes it important to understand the radia- tion eﬀects in materials and the displacement mechanism of atoms during particle irradiation.
Despite the tremen- dous knowledge available in this ﬁeld it is still not well understood how to manipulate thin ﬁlms, nanocrystalline materials, etc. in a proper way under ion irradiation driven conditions [4,5].
Ion-beam assisted processing of materials always leads to ion-beam mixing (IM), hence it is a topic of a consider- able technological interest.
One of the greatest challenges is to keep IM in a controllable fashion and to drive sys- tems to a desired atomic conﬁguration.
IM is oftenly used for amorphization, when ion bombardment drives the system far from its equilibrium [3,4].
Ion beam bombard- ment in mechanically stressed thin ﬁlms and radiation- induced viscous ﬂow are also hot topics of the area [6].
Two types of phenomenological models have been de- veloped to describe ion beam mixing.
The ballistic model assumes only the kinematic properties of the materi- als and the elastic collisions of energetic particles (re- coils) hence the deposited energy depends on the relative masses of the colliding atoms [7].
The eﬀectivity of bal- listic mixing (BM) will depend on then the concentration of recoils with relatively short mean free path which we call hot atoms.
BM tends to randomize atomic conﬁgura- tions leading to disordering of crystalline ordered phases even in precipitating systems [5,8].
The slowing down of energetic particles, however, leads to energy deposition and to local melting.
When a local volume is heated up induced by the slowed down incoming ion and by the recoils, a thermal spike is created [9].
The ballistic random diﬀusion process [8] might also be active still during the TS and above a threshold en- ergy leads to the formation of stable Frenkel pairs.
This results in a supersaturation of the point defects and the enhancement of thermal diﬀusion [8].
The competition between thermally activated and ballistic diﬀusional mix- ing might be a key ingredient of IM [2,8,10].
In Mar- tin’s ballistic diﬀusional theory atomic interdiﬀusion is inﬂuenced by atomic collisions and thermodynamic forces [10].
The latter is associated with thermally activated 1jumps of point defects.
In addition, thermochemical forces could be set in and inﬂuence thermally activated atomic transitions [9]. In ref.
[18] it was explicitly demonstrated by MD simula- tions that within an artiﬁcal Cu/Cu bilayer system the heat of mixing has a considerable eﬀect on broadening.
Therefore the coexistence of chemical interdiﬀusion and BM could easily be occurred (chemically guided colli- sional mixing [12]).
The inﬂuence of thermodynamic driving forces on IM is summarized by Cheng [11] within a series of bilayer samples.
Although they found a considerable scatter in the data the trend seems to be unmistakable: the amount of IM depends linearly on ∆Hm as it was proposed by Johnson and co-workers [14], and the slope of the mix- ing versus heat of mixing (∆Hm) curve is proportional to the cascade temperature (∼104 K) [9].
This TS model is based on the Vineyard model developed for thermally activated atomic transitions [15], and relates IM to the thermodynamic quantities, the cohesive energy (Ecohes) and ∆Hm.
The model sharply distinguish between bal- listic and TS mixing.
The chemical interdiﬀusion model is supported in a number of ways experimentally [9,16], however, mostly at high ion energies (several hundreds keV or even more).
The TS concept assumes that follow- ing a short cascade period a stable liquid phase occurs which persists up to several ps and no high energy par- ticles (recoils) survive the cascade period.
The mechanism of IM, is, however, less extensively studied at lower energies experimentaly [1] and by atom- istic simulations [9,13,17–21].
What is more or less ac- cepted now that the thermal spike plays an essential role in IM above 1 keV ion energy [1].
Although the magni- tude of TS IM is uncertain with the increasing ion energy.
While the TS model assumes that all the atomic trans- port occur during the TS, other authors suggest that IM takes place afterwards, in the relaxation period, because of the motion of radiation-induced defects [12].
In our recent communication we studied the eﬀect of ∆Hm on IM in Ti/Pt by MD simulations and found no apparent eﬀect of chemical forces on intermixing [20].
This is in contrast with other low-energy MD studies where the ef- fect of ∆Hm was apparent [18,19].
We discuss in detail in the Discussion section the possible reason of the dis- crepancy.
Low energy ion mixing (several keV or less) is even more complicated because in this case the ion-solid in- teraction takes place close to the free surface and the structural rearrangements at the surface and the bulk are coupled [20,21].
The atomic relocation processes are aﬀected by the proximity of the surface leading to a co- operative atomic transport as well as to surface cavity growth [21].
In this paper we report on molecular dynamics sim- ulations up to 7 keV ion energy in two metal bilayers. As in ref.
[20] we found no apparent dependence of IM on ∆Hm, although we explicitly demonstrate that an ex- tended liquid ensemble (TS) is present at the interface.
Contrary to this a strong inﬂuence of the atomic mass ra- tio on interfacial mixing is explored.
Hence the role of the TS model can be questionized below 7 keV ion energy.
We have chosen two system for detailed studies of IM: the already at low energies well studied Ti/Pt [20] and the Al/Pt systems.
These bilayers are chosen because of the considerable diﬀerence in the atomic masses of the constituents and as such are suitable for the study of the eﬀect of the mass ratio on IM [21].
We examine the relative role of ballistic mixing vs. thermally activated vacancy mechanism as it was given in the macroscopic continuum model of Martin [2,10].
A diﬀerent picture could be emerged if both processes are understood as fast diﬀusion processes in an atomistic description which act against each other [2,5].
The structure of this paper is as follows.
First we out- line the simulation method used and deﬁne certain ex- pressions used frequently throughout the paper.
In the discussion section we focus on the problem of the coex- istence of the ballistic mechanism and the thermal spike.
We also demonstrate the decoupling of the ballistic and thermally activated diﬀusional mixing processes.
We dis- cuss and explain the presence of a backscattering mass eﬀect of the light particles at the interface. II.
THE SETUP OF THE SIMULATION Classical molecular dynamics simulations [22] were used to simulate the ion-solid interaction using the PAR- CAS code developed by Nordlund et al. [23].
Here we only shortly summarize the most important aspects.
The variable timestep and the Berendsen temperature control is used [22].
The bottom layers are held ﬁxed and used as heat sink (heat bath) to maintain the thermal equi- librium of the entire system.
The detailed description of other technical aspects of the MD simulations are given in [23] and details speciﬁc to the current system in recent communications [20,21].
The Ti/Pt sample consists of 328000 atoms for the in- terface (IF) system with 16 Ti top layers and a bulk which is Pt.
The lattice constants for Pt is a ≈3.92 ˚A and for Ti a ≈2.95 and c ≈4.68 ˚A. At the interface (111) of the fcc crystal is parallel to (0001) of the hcp crystal and close packed directions are parallel [25].
The interfacial system as a heterophase bicrystal and a composite object of two diﬀerent crystals with diﬀerent symmetry are cre- ated as follows: the hcp Ti is put by hand on the (111) Pt bulk and various structures are probed and are put together randomly.
Finally that one is selected which has the smallest misﬁt strain prior to the relaxation run.
The remaining misﬁt is properly minimized below ∼6% during the relaxation process so that the Ti and Pt lay- ers keep their original crystal structure and we get an atomically sharp interface.
The corresponding Ti-Ti and Pt-Pt interatomic (ﬁrst neighbour) distances are 2.89 and 2.73 ˚A at the interface.
The Ti (hcp) and Pt (fcc) lay- 2ers at the interface initially are separated by 2.8 ˚A and allowed freely to relax during the simulations.
The varia- tion of the equilibrium Ti-Pt distance within a reasonable 2.6 −3.0 ˚A interval in the interatomic potential does not aﬀect the ﬁnal results signiﬁcantly.
We ﬁnd the average value of d ≈2.65 ˚A Ti-Pt distance in the various irradi- ation steps and also in the nonirradiated system after a careful relaxation process.
We believe that the system is properly relaxed and equilibrated before the irradiation steps.
Another sample (Al/Pt) consists of 280000 atoms (200×200×100˚A for the interface (IF) system with 6 fcc- Al top layers and a bulk which is fcc-Pt both with (111) orientation.
The interface is (111) oriented.
We ﬁnd the size of the system is large enough to limit the inﬂuence of the boundaries on the internal material transport.
The embedded atomic potential of Cleri and Rosato [27] is used and modiﬁed to reproduce the interatomic distance for Al-Pt found in the AlPt alloy.
The heat of mixing for Al-Pt is also ﬁtted to the experimental values [28], although we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant dependence on it in ac- cordance with earlier ﬁndings in the TiPt system [20].
This system size is capable of accepting as large as 8 keV ion bombardment.
In this paper we show results at 6 keV ion energy.
The entire interfacial system is equilibrated prior to the irradiation simulations and the temperature scaled softly down towards zero at the outermost three atomic layers during the cascade events [23].
We believe that the system is properly relaxed and equilibrated be- fore the irradiation steps.
We found no vacancies at the interface or elsewhere in the system after the relaxation procedure.
We visually checked and found no apparent screw dislocations, misorientations or any kind of unde- sired distortions (in general stress-generator dislocations) at the interface or elsewhere in the system which could result in stress induced rearrangements in the crystal dur- ing the simulations.
Collsion cascades were initiated by giving an Ar atom a kinetic energy of 1-7 keV at 7 deg impact angle (graz- ing angle of incidence) and at randomly chosen impact positions in the central region of the free surface.
The SRIM96 electronic stopping power [26] was used to de- scribe energy loss to electrons for all atoms with a kinetic energy higher then 10 eV. We used a many body potential, the type of an embedded-atom-method given by Cleri and Rosato [27], to describe interatomic interactions.
This type of a po- tential gives a very good description of lattice vacancies, including migration properties and a reasonable descrip- tion of solid surfaces and melting [27].
Since the present work is mostly associated with the elastic properties, melting behaviors, surface, interface and migration en- ergies, we believe the model used should be suitable for this study.
The Ti-Pt and Al-Pt interatomic potential of the Cleri-Rosato [27] type is ﬁtted to the experimental heat of mixing of the corresponding alloy system.
Fur- ther details are also given elsewhere [20,21].
To obtain a statistics, several events are generated (∼5 −10), and the typical events are analyzed in the paper.
Therefore no averaging is carried out over the events.
The varia- tion of mixing as a function of the impact position and various events is shown in refs. [20,21].
Following the simulations we analyse the generated structural data base (movie ﬁle) which contains the his- tories of the atomic positions using a code written for this purpose.
The analysis includes the identiﬁcation of va- cancies, liquid and mixed atoms, mean free path of recoils and the extraction of information on local temperature of high energy particles using the results of liquid analysis.
Those atoms are recognised mixed (intermixed) which moved at least 0.5 monolayers (∼1.4 ˚A) across the in- terface.
The recognition of vacancies is done using a Voronoy polyhedron analysis together with a Wigner-Seitz occu- pation analysis [23,29].
Within this approach we inter- pret voids, cavities or craters as vacancy clusters [21].
Another problem is that in liquids, such as appears dur- ing the thermal spike, the deﬁnition of vacancies is rather plausible since the empty cells within a liquid are highly mobile.
Hence during the TS we monitor only formally the time evolution of the number of vacancies.
This is important to indentify the appearance of the supersatu- ration of vacancies, which is in fact the monitoring of the change of the concentration of the empty cells within a liquid zone.
Liquid analysis is also carried out and we call an en- ergetic atom liquid if its and its ﬁrst neighbours kinetic energy exceed kTm where Tm is the melting tempera- ture.
Important requirement for a liquid atom is that it should be a member of a real liquid ensemble, hence an individual fast moving hot atom or a recoil can not be considered as liquid.
Though the quench rate of the liquid phase is large, it can persist normally up to several ps.
In certain cases (e.g. Al/Pt at 6 keV) we observe an extraordinary long lifespan for the local melt reaching 20 ps or even more.
It turned out that one has to be care- ful when deﬁning the liquid atoms.
Strictly speaking we denote those atoms liquid for which Tm < Tlocal < TT S, where Tlocal and TT S are the local temperature and an ar- bitrary upper limit for the TS temperature, respectively.
The time dependent local temperature of the ith high energy particle (Ti,local(t)) can be given as follows: 1 2miv2 i (t) = 3 2kTi,local(t), (1) where vi and mi are the atomic velocity and mass of the ith high energy particle and k is the Boltzmann constant.
We chose TT S ≈Tm + 1000 K, which seems to be a rea- sonable choice, because an atom with Tlocal >> TT S is moving through the liquid/solid interface and migrates rapidly in the interstitial space (recoil).
We also carry out recoil and hot atom analysis.
For a hot atom we use the deﬁnition Tm + 1000 < Tlocal.
We ﬁnd a consider- able amount of hot atoms both in Ti/Pt and in Al/Pt at various ion energies.
In Al/Pt under 6 keV bombard- ment the high energy particles persist up to 20 ps.
We 3use the notation recoil for those individual high energy particles, which can have extraordinarily high local tem- perature and very short lifetime (τrecoil < 3 −500 Fs) with long mean free path (> 10 ˚A).
Hot atoms, how- ever, can be taken as highly mobile high energy particles with medium mean free path (around several times the lattice constant).
Therefore the hot atoms might ther- malize a given region with a size of which is comparable with the mean free path of the hot species.
The kinetic energy of a hot atom is below the threshold of a sta- ble Frenkel pair formation energy therefore the ballistic jumps of hot atoms lead to subthreshold events which, however, are shown to contribute noticeably to the evo- lution of the damaged structure during IM (e.g. close Frenkel-pair recombinations, etc.) [30].
Another basic diﬀerence between a recoil and a hot atom is that the former is moving ”freely” in the solid while the latter is a weakly bounded particle, hence it interacts weakly with its neighbourhood.
It should also be mentioned that a brief deﬁniton of hot atoms has given in ref.
[23] where those energetic atom are considered hot which have ex- perienced less then 3-5 lattice vibrations.
In this paper we prefer to select the energetic particles on the basis of their local temperature regime.
In order to avoid confusion we deﬁne the expressions diﬀusion and migration.
These phenomena are widely used in the literature for diﬀerent processes [24], although their meaning often is not clearly deﬁned.
Even more dif- ﬁcult to deﬁne the precise meaning of radiation enhanced diﬀusion (RED).
In the present article in general we use the expression diﬀusion for any kind of atomic migration processes which are taken through a solid.
Usually dif- fusion is used for slow atomic migration process on a ms or longer timescale.
Therefore we use the ”fast” or ”ul- trafast” diﬀusion expressions if the timescale is shorter [3,10,25].
If we do not specify the duration of the pro- cess, we prefer to use atomic migration.
Also we use the notion RED for those atomic transport processes which are taken place within tens or hundreds of ps.
This is typ- ically the timescale of MD simulations.
Sometimes the RED is used for any kind of atomic transport phenom- ena in the literature which appears under irradiation.
We prefer not to use RED for diﬀusion on a longer timescale (ms or longer) which is in our opinion can not be distin- guished from diﬀusion under parent conditions [24].
The expression ballistic diﬀusion [8] can also be used instead of (ultra)fast diﬀusion. III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION First we focus on the lack of the dependence of IM on chemical forces and then we try to address a ballistic scenario for mixing without the usage of the TS concept [11].
Already we have presented in our previous com- munication [20] that we ﬁnd no dependence on ∆Hm in Ti/Pt, although we found extensive IM at 1 keV ion -30 -20 -10 0 10 x 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 z Pt Ti -40 -20 0 20 40 x 10 20 30 40 50 60 z Pt Al -40 -20 0 20 40 x 20 30 40 50 60 70 z FIG. 1.
The cross sectional view of the Ti/Pt system after a 7 keV irradiation at the end of the relaxation process.
The overlayer is Ti and the substrate is the Pt. Middle panel: The cross sectional view of Al/Pt after 6 keV irradiation and 55 ps after the ion impact.
The thickness of the cross-sectional slabs are 10 ˚A in both cases.
Lower panel: The cross sectional view of Al/Pt after 6 keV at 2.5 ps. 4energy.
The Cleri-Rosato many body potential can be ﬁtted to the experimental heat of mixing or can be var- ied in order to account for any values of ∆Hm.
Hereby we do not give the technical details of the variation of ∆Hm in the interatomic potential and refer to another ref. [20].
Furthermore, we explored the decoupling of the intermixing of the constituents: ﬁrst the bulk Pt atoms are ejected to the top layers and at the end of the TS the top layer Ti atoms are injected to the Pt bulk.
We had no clear cut explanation for this unexpected behavior of this system.
In this paper we would like to demonstrate that basically we ﬁnd the same eﬀects at higher energies.
In the next subsections we summarize the results ob- tained and outline certain possible scenarios which might help to understand IM.
These are the following: com- peting dynamics between ballistic diﬀusion and vacancy saturation induced reordering [10].
We explain the asym- metric mixing by a backscattering eﬀect of the light atoms at the interface which delays their intermixing.
We try to compare our results with experiments obtained for glassy and amorphised metals in order to point out the parallels.
In any of the outlined mechanisms we discuss the essential role of hot atoms in IM.
A. Intermixing and liquid analysis The cross-sectional view of the irradiated Ti/Pt sam- ple at 7 keV is shown after 30 ps of the ion impact in FIG (1) which clearly demonstrate that the interface is damaged and large amount of intermixing occured and remained there built-in.
A complete animation is avail- able on the world wide web [32].
Liquid analysis pro- vides us the information that the number of liquid atoms is increased heavily with the increasing ion energy (FIG (3)).
Therefore there should be present a liquid phase which behaves as a real TS.
Contrary to this we ﬁnd no apparent dependence on ∆Hm.
Even if ∆Hm ≥0, con- siderable mixing occurs instead of segregation.
This is in direct conﬂict with the results obtained in ref. [18].
We explain the discrepancy with the following.
Gades and Urbassek studied the eﬀect of ∆Hm on IM in an ar- tiﬁcal system of Cu/Cu bilayer [18].
They varied ∆Hm within this system in which the ﬁrst six layers consist of natural Cu and the substrate of a modiﬁed Cu which has a positive or negative heat of mixing towards Cu.
They found a strong eﬀect of ∆Hm on broadening.
We attribute the presence of a chemically guided mixing to the 1:1 mass ratio, to the lack of lattice missmatch and and to the same cohesive energy in the bulk and in the overlayer.
Within their computer experiment the only variable was ∆Hm, while in a real system this is far not the case.
In a general bilayer system couple of other pa- rameters set in which may suppress the eﬀect of ∆Hm.
The relocation energy of an atom in a solid is aﬀected by a couple of other parameters [31].
E.g. in the case of Ti/Pt and Al/Pt there is a considerable mass ratio, dif- ference in cohesive energy and in the melting points of the constituents not to mention the lattice missmatch.
An- other problem with chemically guided IM is that ∆Hm could only aﬀect atomic transport processes when the atoms are moving relatively slowly with ordinary diﬀu- sion.
Fast moving particles are only weakly inﬂuenced by chemical forces and the chemical environment aﬀects only those species which are bounded at a lattice site.
We will show later on that the concentration of ballis- tic particles (hot atoms) is suﬃciently high in Ti/Pt and in Al/Pt during the TS to supress the eﬀect of ∆Hm.
Although the chemical interaction between liquid atoms is stronger, however, their mobility might still be suﬃ- ciently high to be aﬀected only weakly by ∆Hm.
This is a subject, however, what should be carefully examined in the future and which goes beyond the scope of the present article.
We ﬁnd a strong asymmetric behavior in mixing (FIG (2)).
The decoupling of the mixing of the top layer con- stituent from the TS period is also apparent (FIG (2)).
Asymmetric mixing behavior has also been observed in Ni/Ag [17] and in Cu/Ni or in Cu/Co [19].
In our case ﬁrst the heavier element Pt mixes and the intermixing of the light constituent Al or Ti is initiated at 5 ps.
The mixing of Ti (Ti/Pt) continues after the TS period hence no liquid atom is required for the mixing of Ti.
Pt mix- ing peaks at around 4 ps.
We ﬁnd no intermixing hot or liquid Ti atoms.
The number of vacancies Nvac exhibits a sharp peak at 4 ps (upper FIG (2)) which corresponds to a highly dif- fuse liquid state in the Ti overlayers and approximately the number of vacancies is 3 % of the number of the liquid atoms which indeed leads to the sudden decrease of the atomic density (not shown).
The intermixing of the Ti atoms might be initiated by the saturation of Pt vacancy concentration at around 4 ps.
The supersatura- tion of point defects results in enhanced atomic mobility [2]: a ballistic jumps are increasingly probable in the direction of nearby vacancies.
Replacement collision se- quences might be inititated in this way (via subtreshold collisions) which enhances atomic mixing [2].
The results of the liquid analysis are also shown for Ti/Pt and Al/Pt at 7 and 6 keV in FIG (3).
The TS per- sists up to ∼20 ps in Al/Pt, which is an unusually long lifetime.
The longest reported lifetime for a TS (τT S) is 14 ps for Au at a similar ion energy regime in a 5 keV cascade event [29].
For pure Al and for Pt a much shorter τT S ≈4 ps is obtained [29].
Also, in pure elements one can ﬁnd no damage at the end of the simulation hence the restoring forces (recrystallization) are strong [21].
As already mentioned above, in the bilayer systems, how- ever, the damage rate is high, the recovery process is uncomplete within the timescale of the MD simulations.
Moreover the accumulated damage rate is so high that it might also be remained built-in on a longer timescale.
In case of Al/Pt the average local temperature far ex- ceeds the melting point of Al (∼Tm ≈982 K) value and is stabilized around ∼T ≈1800 K.
When the number 50 5 10 15 20 25 30 time (ps) 0 30 60 90 the number of atoms mixed Pt vacancies mixed Ti 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 time (ps) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 the number of atoms mixed Pt mixed Al vacancies 0 20 40 400 500 600 700 FIG. 2.
The time evolution of mixing and vacancy forma- tion in Ti/Pt (upper ﬁgure) at 7 keV ion energy.
Mixing proﬁle in Al /Pt (lower ﬁgure) together with the time evolu- tion of vacancies at 6 keV ion energy.
The number of adatoms are also shown in the inset of the lower ﬁgure as a function of the time (ps).
of liquid atoms is less then a critical value (∼50), the local temperature starts to oscillate due to the abrupt condensation of the liquid atoms at the end of the TS.
The TS exhibits in general an ultrarapid quenching rate (∼1014 −1015 K/s, ∼100 −1000 K/ps) which is much larger then the values are given in the literature ∼1012 K/s for supercooled metallic glasses [4]), leading to a quenched metastable solid solution at the interface with compositions lying beyond the equilibrium solubil- ity limit.
Others also propose that fast quenching, occur- ring the estimated rate of about 1014 K/s provides ideal conditions to nucleate metastable phases, including the amorphous one [36] or to the clustering of vacancies [21].
We ﬁnd also a broad amorphous interphase as demon- strated in the middle FIG (1).
Glassy metals exihibit a polymorphic melting point falls below the ambient temperature and below the glass transition temperature of the liquid phase.
Under these circumstances the oversaturated solution undergoes a crystal-to-glass transformation [4].
We ﬁnd also a poly- morphic melting point (liquid temperature) which lies be- tween the parent melting point of the constiuents.
The fast ”cool” mixing of Ti might be induced by a glassy state saturated by vacancies.
The mixing of Ti is fast enough not to be uderstood by a simple vacancy mech- anism [24].
Therefore we argue that a glassy sate might accelerate the diﬀusion of the Ti species.
The initializa- tion of mixing of Ti coincides with the sudden fall of Nvac.
Hence the vacancy supersaturation initializes a fast inter- mixing which requires no liquid atoms in Ti/Pt.
In Al/Pt the situation is somewhat diﬀerent.
Here the vacancies tend to aggregate while in Ti/Pt a diﬀuse vacancy satu- ration occurs with little or no vacancy clustering which favors the formation of a glassy sate.
The broad intermixed interface in Al/Pt (seen in FIG (1)) is consistent with the ion-induced amorphization ex- periment carried out on Al/Pt [34,35], in which a uni- form mixing is achieved and conﬁrmed the existence of an amorphous phase at the interface over a large compo- sition range.
In general it is well documented now that binary metal systems undergo solid-sate amorphization by interdiﬀusion or by other type of mixing [4].
Another interesting feature of FIG (3) is the time evo- lution of recoils/hot atoms.
The recoils dissapear at the end of the cascade period (∼0.3 ps) [9].
The sharp peak at ∼0.3 ps corresponds to the recoils.
However, we ﬁnd that a large amount of high energy particles (hot atoms) survive the cascade cooling.
This is a rather surpris- ing result and it shows that the ballistic period with hot atoms coexists with the TS in these bilayers.
In the inset of lower FIG (3) we show that the average temperature of the hot atoms far exceeds Tm.
In FIG (4) we show the time evolution of hot and liquid atoms separately for various atom types.
Not surprisingly the various atoms exhibit diﬀerent time evolution due to the large melt- ing point diﬀerence.
The number of Pt hot and liquid atoms delays rapidly while the number of Al energetic particles show a saturation at 5 ps.
It has been found 60 1 2 3 4 5 time (ps) 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 the number of atoms 7 keV 3 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 2000 4000 6000 local temperature liquid hot 0 5 10 15 20 time (ps) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 the number of atoms liquid atoms recoil / hot  0 5 10 15 20 25 0 2000 4000 temperature (K) hot  liquid FIG. 3.
Upper panel: The number of liquid atoms in Ti/Pt at various ion energies up to 7 keV and the local average temperature (K) at 7 keV ion energy (inset).
Lower panel: The number of liquid, hot atoms and recoils in Al/Pt as a function of the time (Fs).
inset: the time evolution of the local temperature in the liquid phase (K), the number of the liquid atoms, recoils and hot particles.
that the solidiﬁcation time of the cascade together with hot and liquid atoms depends on the melting point of the material [19,23].
Hence the intermixed Pt particles quench out more rapidly from the liquid zone then the Al atoms and remained mixed atoms at the liquid zone boundary.
Nevertheless it should be mentioned that in Ti/Pt the number of Pt liquid and hot atoms is consid- erably smaller then those of Ti because the displacement cascade is localized in the overlayer and the Pt side of interface is hit only slightly by recoils.
This is because a relatively thick Ti overlayer is constructed (with 16 monolayers).
In Al/Pt the Pt atoms exhibit a second hot 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 time (ps) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 the number of atoms hot Pt Ti 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 200 400 600 800 Pt liquid Ti 0 5 10 15 20 25 time (ps) 0 200 400 600 800 1000 the number of atoms hot Pt Al 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 500 1000 liquid Pt Al FIG. 4.
Upper panel: The time evolution of the number of hot and liquid atoms (inset) in Ti/Pt at 8 keV Ar+ irradia- tion.
Lower panel: The time evolution of the number of liquid (inset) and hot atoms in Al/Pt at 6 keV ion irradiation.
and liquid atom peak (the ﬁrst one is due to the recoils) at 2 ps which coincides with the end of the fast mixing of Pt atoms (FIG (2)).
Hence the hot atom peak is a mix- ing peak due to the ballistically mixing hot Pt particles.
In Ti/Pt we see only the broadening of the ﬁrst recoil peak hence the increasing mass diﬀerence might induce the development of a second recoil (hot) peak.
B. Thermally activated diﬀusion and vacancies In Ti/Pt we found that the fast quench of the TS leads to extensive vacancy formation [20], and this is what in- duces the injection of Ti atoms to the bulk.
Hence we also support a vacancy mechanism for mixing with a light 7atom injection to the bulk.
The large concentration of va- cancies is an indicative of a glassy interface [3].
It should be remarked that Pt intermixes to the top layers during the TS possibly with a ballistic interdiﬀusion mechanism because we ﬁnd a considerable amount of mixing hot Pt atoms.
The interdiﬀusion of Pt leads to amorphous inter- layer growth at the original interface and in this sense resemble to an anomalous fast diﬀusion [3,25].
Moreover due to the elevated temperature of the TS, a thermally activated diﬀusion process might become dominant.
Al- though at this moment it is diﬃcult to determine whether thermally activated or ballistic diﬀusion is the dominant atomic migration process during the TS.
In Al/Pt we see that the number of vacancies peaks at 2.5 ps.
A more elaborate analysis of the structures at that time we see that vacancies are clustering and tem- porarily form a cavity (lower FIG (1).
Hence in Al/Pt the supersaturation of vacancies leads to clustering while in Ti/Pt we have still a higly diﬀuse liquid state.
The most of the vacancies are located in the overlayer.
Com- paring the heat of formation of a vacancy ∆HV we ﬁnd that ∆HV ≈1.31 and 0.74 eV for Pt and for Al [33].
This is a marked diﬀerence and explains the large discrepancy in the number of vacancies in these metals.
The value for Al is in the energy regime of the hot atoms hence the formation of vacant sites throughtout the TS can be expected.
In Pt, however, we see that the vacancies dis- sappear rapidly (not shown).
A competition between BM and vacancy saturation induced atomic transport (vacancy mixing) might also be active in irradiated samples [8].
The BM tends to randomize (disordering) the system leading to thermal- ization and vacancy saturation.
The thermally activated vacancy recombination or net ﬂux through the interface induces reordering [8].
In our samples we see the domi- nant feature of ballistic mixing in both cases for the Pt atoms.
In Ti/Pt, however, the Ti atoms intermix with a vacancy mechanism afterwards the TS.
In Al/Pt both species migrate with a ballistic diﬀusion.
C. Mixing at 1 keV ion energy In order to show that the long-lived hot atoms exist even at lower ion energies we recall our results presented in ref.
[20] and give further details at 1 keV energy.
We ﬁnd the same eﬀect for 1 keV bombardment of Ti/Pt, where the intermixing of Ti coexists with the formation of vacancies [20] (upper FIG 5).
On a longer timescale in upper FIG (5) we see the oscillation of Nmix,T i (mixed Ti atoms) which is due to a short distance movement of these atoms at the interface.
The vacancies in the interface tend to nucleate as it is demonstrated in ref.
[21] leading to a cavity growth under repeated irradiations.
Therefore we see a tendency to cavity formation in these systems which is coupled to a mixing induced material transport [21].
The number of interstitial atoms (inset 0 5 10 15 20 time (ps) 0 10 20 30 the number of atoms vacancies mixed Ti mixed Pt 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 time (ps) 0 50 100 150 200 the number of atoms liquid atoms recoil / hot 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 2000 4000 6000 liquid hot atoms 0 1 2 3 4 time (ps) 20 40 60 the number of mixed atoms liq Pt liq Ti hot Pt hot Ti FIG. 5.
Upper panel: The number of vacancies, adatoms and intermixed atoms in Ti/Pt at 1 keV Ar+ irradiation as a function of time.
The time evolution of the numbers of interstitials is also shown in the inset.
Middle panel: The time evolution of the number of liquid and hot atoms.
The average temperature (K) is shown of the liquid and hot atoms as a funtcion of time (ps) Lower panel: The time evolution of the number of mixed hot and liquid atoms.
8upper FIG (5)) exhibits a similar time evolution to that of the vacancies which indicates us that the mixing of Ti atoms is accomplished by vacancy exchange mechanism via interstitial atoms.
The vacancy mechanism is well established as the dominant mechanism of diﬀusion in fcc metals and alloys and has been shown to be operative in many hcp metals [24].
However, it must be admitted that the mixing of Ti is quite fast.
More then 20 Ti atoms intermix during 2.5 ps at the end of the TS and IM survives the quench of the TS.
Two types of intermixing mechanism can be seen which are more or less decoupled in time from each other: First the fast ballistic diﬀuser specie intermixes to the over- layer during the TS partly to the interstitial positions or partly to vacancies left behind by overlayer atoms which migrated to the surface (adatoms).
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 x 20 40 60 80 z Al Pt interface mixed hot Al free surface FIG. 6.
A crossectional slab of hot atoms with a slab thick- ness of 10 ˚A at 5 ps in Al/Pt after 6 keV irradiation.
Note that the Al recoils are reﬂected at interface while Pt recoils enter the interface hence intermix to the overlayers.
Inter- mixed hot Al atoms are also shown by light colored crosses after 5 ps.
After cooling of the TS adatoms return from the sur- face to the overlayer [20] and push Ti atoms to the bulk.
It should be remarked that in the case of Al/Pt the in- termixing of Al starts still during the TS, however, in both cases sets in at around 5 ps in the high ion energy cases (FIG (2)).
The timescale of this fast atomic mi- gration is very short (fractions of ps) in agreement with the ﬁndings obtained phenomenologically [36].
In the lower FIG (5) the number of the intermixed liquid and hot atoms are shown.
One can see that a con- siderable amount of energetic particles are mixed time to time to the overlayers.
Interestingly no or only few hot and liquid Ti atoms are mixed to the bulk, although they are present during the TS in the overlayers.
We explain this by the backscattering of the energetic light atoms (Ti) at the interface due to the large atomic mass diﬀer- ence (see later).
This phenomenon is already discussed brieﬂy in ref.
[18], although they reached the conclusion that the eﬀect of mass is small.
Probably that is the rea- son of the decoupling of the mixing of the constituents and the delay of IM of the light atoms.
The mean free path of the hot atoms is around ∼10 ˚A and the corre- sponding velocity of these mixing energetic particles is a robust ∼0.5 ˚A/Fs (∼50 m/s).
D. Backscattering at the interface and mass eﬀect The backscattering phenomenon is shown in detail in FIG (6) in Al/Pt after 6 keV bombardment.
It can clearly be seen that the Al atoms are reﬂected at the interface until 5 ps, however, after 5 ps they start to move beyond the interface.
The reﬂection can be under- stood by simple kinematic reasons: the large mass diﬀer- ence between Pt and Al results in the scattering of the light atoms.
Both species are reﬂected at the solid/liquid zone boundary.
It should also be mentioned that we ﬁnd the same scattering phenomenon in Ti/Pt.
The treshold time for Al or Ti intermixing is still rather puzzling.
By the moment we attribute it to a vacancy supersatura- tion induced mixing which is strong enough driving force for moving beyond the interface the light atoms at 5 ps.
The reﬂecting particles are conﬁned within the thermal- ized hot zone leading to superheating of the liquid region (Taver ≈4000 K).
Superheating eﬀects under pressure in encapsulated metal clusters has also been reported [37].
The subject of superheating is, however, beyond the scope of the present article and hereby we simple note that the local melt of the TS is also under pressure put by the surrounding media hence superheating properties might also be present.
The supersaturation of vacancies is also a consequence of the conﬁnement induced ther- malization.
The treshold time 5 ps for the light atom mixing coincides with the saturation of the number of hot Al atoms (lower FIG (3)) and with the sudden de- crease in the number of vacancies (FIG (2)).
One might be assumed that at 5 ps the interface becomes suﬃciently damaged and saturated by vacancies to be permeable for light energetic atoms.
The temporal conﬁnement of the cascade in the overlayer is also found in ref.
[18], although they found much smaller mass eﬀect since the smallest mass ratio was 0.5.
We expect the similar conﬁnement ef- fect in the reverse case when the bulk is formed from the light atoms and the overlayer is from the heavy atoms.
In this particular case the light hot atoms are reﬂected from the interface from below, hence the superheated region has no connection with the surface.
In FIG (4) the number of Al hot atoms NAl,hot peaks at 5 ps which supports the idea of interfacial barrier climbing at 5 ps: when NAl,hot peaks Al hot atoms break through the interface and deposit their kinetic energy at the Pt side.
Therefore the interface is a ballistic bar- rier for interfacial mixing of light atoms even if they are hot atoms.
Therefore the barrier results in the phe- nomenon what we call retarded ballistic mixing due to the semipermeable interface.
When the overlayers are suﬃ- ciently frustrated by vacancy supersaturation, the light atoms break through the interface.
This process is much 9slower, however, then the fast ballistic diﬀusion of Pt.
The backscattering eﬀect is also interesting in that point of view that the semipermeable interface divides the TS volume into to separated regions.
On the permeable side (Pt side) the liquid atoms are Pt atoms while on the Ti or Al side the local melt is a mixture of the constituents.
Therefore there can be a concentration gradient towards the Pt side which can drive the intermixing of Ti or Al according to the Fick’s law [24].
In that case the driving force of ballistic mixing would be a concentration and a thermal gradient which changes sign during the ther- mal spike (Al/Pt) or due to the quench of the local melt (Ti/Pt).
IV. CONCLUSION We demonstrated that a bilayer system exhibits en- hanced intermixing properties and an increased thermal spike lifetime when compared with the values obtained in pure elements.
We attribute this behaviour to the suﬃciently large diﬀerence in the atomic masses of the constituents (mass ratio).
It is shown that, in a bilayer system under irradia- tion, ion beam mixing is driven by a ballistic mechanism due to the unusually long lifetime of hot particles in sys- tems such as Al/Pt or Ti/Pt with a large mass ratio.
The interfacial mixing for the constituents are decou- pled in time: predominantly Pt mixes to the overlayer by ballistic diﬀusion (cascade mixing) and the light con- stituent (Al or Ti) starts to migrate to the bulk with some time delay.
We ﬁnd that the energetic ligth atoms are backscattered from the interface due to the large mass diﬀerence.
Hence the intermixing of them is delayed sig- niﬁcantly.
We ﬁnd no sign of sensitivity of ion beam mixing to thermochemical properties (heat of mixing).
Instead strong random ballistic diﬀusional features rule the mech- anism with a long lifetime of hot particles hence with an enhanced cascade mixing properties.
A diﬀerent mech- anism is active for the light atom mixing in Ti/Pt and in Al/Pt.
In the former bilayer Ti is injected to the Pt bulk afterwards the TS by a vacancy mechanism while the Al atoms intermix during the TS via a time delayed (retarded) ballistic diﬀusion.
Therefore, there is a great diﬀerence in the details which should be precisely stud- ied case by case.
Finally we would like to remark that in accordance with the theory of Martin [10] we ﬁnd that ballistic diﬀusion and thermally activated vacancy move- ments seem to be suitable for understanding ion beam mixing.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work is supported by the OTKA grants F037710, T043704 and T30430 from the Hungarian Academy of Sci- ences.
Computer time at the Center of Scientiﬁc Computing (NIIF) in Budapest is gratefully acknowledged.
[1] H. Gnaser, Low-Energy Ion Irradiation of Solid Surfaces, Solid-State Physics, 146 (1999), Springer.
[2] G. Martin, P. Bellon, Driven Alloys, Solid State Phys., 50, 189 (1997).
[3] P. R. Okamoto, N. Q. Lam, L. E. Rehn, Physics of Crystal-to-Glass Transformations, Solid State Phys., 52, 1 (1999).
[4] K. Samwer, H. J. Fecht and W. L. Johnson, Amorphiza- tion in Metallic Systems, in Glassy Metals III, eds.
H. Beck, H.-J. Gntherodt, Springer, (1994).
[5] R. A. Enrique, P. Bellon, Phys. Rev. B60, 14649 (1999).
[6] S. G. Mayr, R. S. Averback, Phys. Rev. B68, 214105 (2003).
[7] P. Sigmund, A. Gras-Marti, Nucl Instr. and Meth. 182/183, 25 (1981).
[8] J-M. Roussel, P. Bellon, Phys.
Rev. B65, 144107-1 (2001).
[9] R. S. Averback, T. Diaz de la Rubia, Displacement Dam- age in Irradiated Metals and Semiconductors, Solid State Pysics, 51, 281 (1998).
[10] G. Martin, Phys. Rev. B30, 1424 (1984).
[11] Y.-T. Cheng, Material Science Reports, 5, 45 (1990).
[12] R. Kelly, A. Miotello, Nucl Instr. and Meth.
B122, 374. (1997) A. Miotello, R. Kelly, ibid, 458. (1997) [13] T. Diaz de la Rubia, R. S. Averback, R. Benedek,W. E. King, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1930 (1987).
[14] W. L. Johnson, Y. T. Cheng, M. Van Rossum, and M.-A. Nicolet, Nucl Instr.
and Meth. B7/8, 657 (1985).
[15] G. H. Vineyard, Radiat. Eﬀ. 29, 245 (1976).
[16] A. Crespo-Sosa, M. Munoz, J.-C. Cheang-Wong, A. Oliver, J. M. Saniger, J. G. Banuelos, Mat. Sci.
Eng. B100, 297 (2003), W. Bolse, Mat. Sci. Eng.
A253, 194 (1998), L. C. Wei, R. S. Averback,J. Appl.
Phys. 81, 613 (1997), T. Weber, K. Lieb, J. Appl.
Phys., 73, 3499 (1993), S.-J. Kim, M-A. Nicolet, R. S. Averback, D. Peak, Phys. Rev. B37, 38 (1985), T. A. Workman, Y. T. Cheng, W. L. Johnson, and M.-A. Nicolet, Appl. Phys. Lett. 50, 1486 (1987).
[17] T. J. Colla, H. M. Urbassek, Phys.
Rev. B63, 104206 (2001).
[18] H. Gades, H. M. Urbassek, Phys.
Rev. B51, 14559 (1995), Nucl Instr. and Meth. B115, 485 (1996).
[19] K. Nordlund, R. S. Averback, Phys.
Rev. B 59, 20 (1999).
[20] P. S¨ule, M. Menyh´ard, K. Nordlund, Nucl Instr. and Meth.
B211, 524 (2003), condmat/0302262.
[21] P. S¨ule, M. Menyh´ard, K. Nordlund, Nucl Instr. and Meth.
B, accepted for publication, condmat/0310238.
[22] M. P. Allen, D. J. Tildesley, Comupter Simulation of Liq- uids, (Oxford Science Publications, Oxford 1989) [23] PARCAS was written by K. Nordlund, see e.g., K. Nord- lund, R. S. Averback, Phys. Rev. B56, 2421 (1997), K. 10Nordlund, M. Ghaly, R. S. Averback, M. Caturla, T. Diaz de la Rubia, and J. Tarus, Phys.
Rev. B57, 7556 (1998).
[24] P. G. Shewnon, Diﬀusion in Solids, McGraw-Hill Book, London, (1963).
[25] A. P. Sutton, R. W. Balluﬃ, Interfaces in Crystalline Materials, Oxford Science Publications, Clarendon Press, Oxford, (1996).
[26] J. F. Ziegler, 1996, SRIM-96 computer code, J. F. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, U. Littmark, The Stopping and Range of Ions in Solids, Pergamon Press, (1985).
[27] F. Cleri and V. Rosato, Phys. Rev. B48, 22 (1993), M. S. Daw, S. M. Foiles, and M. I. Baskes, Mater. Sci. Rep. 9, 251 (1993).
[28] A. R. Miedema, Philips Tech. Rev. 36, 217.
(1976) [29] K. Nordlund, R. S. Averback, Phys. Rev. B56, 2421 (1997).
[30] H. Wollenberger, in Vacancies and Interstitials in Metals, edited by A. Seeger, D. Schumacer, W. Schilling, and J. Diehl (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970), p. 215.
[31] A. R. Allnatt, A. B. Lidiard, Atomic Transport in Solids, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Eng- land, (1993) [32] P. S¨ule, http://www.mfa.kfki.hu/∼sule, 2004.
[33] R. A. Swalin, Thermodynamics of Solids, Wiley, London, (1963).
[34] L. S. Hung, M. Nastasi, J. Gyulai, and J. W. Mayer, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 42, 672 (1983).
[35] J. D. R. Buchanan, T. P. A. Hase, B. K. Tanner, P. J. Chen, L. Gan, C. J. Powel, W. F. Egelhoﬀ, Jr., Phys. Rev. B66, 104427 (2002), P. Gas, J. Labar, G. Clugnet, A. Kovacs, C. Bergman, P. Barna, J. Appl.
Phys., 90, 3899 (2001).
[36] P. M. Ossi, Surf.
Sci., 554, 1. (2004).
[37] F. Banhart, E. Hern´andez, M. Terrones, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 90, 185502-1, (2003). 11