1  ACTUATORS, MICROFLUIDICS, NANOBUBBLES    New type of microengine using internal combustion of  hydrogen and oxygen  Vitaly B. Svetovoy*1,2, Remco G. P. Sanders1, Kechun Ma1 & Miko C. Elwenspoek1,3  1MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, PO 217, 7500 AE Enschede,  The Netherlands (v.svetovoy@utwente.nl)  2 Institute of Physics and Technology, Yaroslavl Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences,  150007,Yaroslavl, Russia   3 FRIAS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany  Microsystems become part of everyday life but their application is restricted by  lack of strong and fast motors (actuators) converting energy into motion.
For  example, widespread internal combustion engines cannot be scaled down  because combustion reactions are quenched in a small space.
Here we present  an actuator with the dimensions 100×100×5 µm3 that is using internal  combustion of hydrogen and oxygen as part of its working cycle.
Water  electrolysis driven by short voltage pulses creates an extra pressure of 0.5 – 4  bar for a time of 100 – 400 µs in a chamber closed by a flexible membrane.
When the pulses are switched off this pressure is released even faster allowing  production of mechanical work in short cycles.
We provide arguments that this  unexpectedly fast pressure decrease is due to spontaneous combustion of the  gases in the chamber.
This actuator is the first step to truly microscopic  combustion engines.
The last decennium has witnessed an impressive trend to miniaturize systems of  virtually any kind.
This trend has many reasons: small systems are often cheaper  to produce, they can have properties large systems have not, and they may  facilitate use of large systems (cars, for example).
An important and generic  component in microsystems is the actuator.
It plays role of a motor transforming  electricity or other kind of energy into mechanical power.
In contrast with large  scale systems, where effective engines are available (internal combustion or  electromagnetic motors), microsystems suffer from lack of strong and fast  actuators1,2.
Small electromagnetic motors cannot generate forces of useful  magnitude but internal combustion engines just do not exist at the microscale.
The existing microcombusters3 cannot be a part of microsystems since they have  only one dimension in the range of submillimeters.
Microengines using gas2  combustion perform poorly due to increased heat losses via the volume boundary4,5   when the volume decreases.
However, recently we observed that the reaction  between H2 and O2 gases can be ignited spontaneously in stoichiometric  nanobubbles smaller than 200 nm overcoming this restriction in some way6,7.
The  mechanism is still not clear, but it is expected that both high Laplace pressure and  fast dynamics are important6.
It is not obvious that the reaction in nanobubbles and  performance of the microscopic actuator are related.
Nevertheless, we speculate  that the gas combustion in the chamber happens via combustion in transitional  nanobubbles.
Nanobubbles already demonstrated counterintuitive properties such  as unexpectedly long life time of the surface nanobubbles (see8 for a review).
Mechanism of this stability is still debated9-12 after more than 10 years of active  discussion.
Existing microactuators are using mostly two types of forces1,2,13,14: electrostatic  forces (weak) and those generated by thermal expansion (slow).
Small  electromagnetic motors cannot generate forces of useful magnitude but fast and  strong piezoelectric elements are not compatible with microtechnology  and need a  high voltage for actuation.
Some progress was achieved  with the use of  electroactive polymers15-17 but they are not suitable for many applications in  microsystems.
Electrochemical actuation was also discussed in many papers18-24 but  it is notoriously slow.
One can produce a large amount of gas in a short time but it  is impossible to get rid of this gas also fast.
In this paper we present an actuator  that uses alternating polarity (AP)  short-time electrolysis6,7 to produce H2 and O2  gases but termination of the gases happens very fast due to spontaneous  combustion.
Results  Fabrication and characterization.
The actuators were fabricated on Si wafers  covered with a layer of silicon rich nitride (SiRN) (thickness 530 nm) containing3  deposited Pt electrodes of different designs.
This layer played the role of the actuator  membrane.
The membrane was made free by etching the wafer from the back side.
The  chamber and filling channels were isotropically etched in borofloat wafers.
The glass and  Si wafers were anodically bonded as shown in Fig. 1.
A polysilicon thermal sensor  designed for four-probe measurements  was fabricated underneath the electrodes (see  details in Supplementary).
The bonded wafers were diced into separate chips with the  size 2×1 cm2 .
The actuator chamber with the nominal dimensions 100×100×5 µm3 was  filled via the channel (cross section 10×5 µm2) with a solution of Na2SO4 in deionized  water.
In most cases the salt concentration was around 1 M. The inlet and outlet  openings were sealed with a foil, the chip was glued to a printed circuit board (PCB)  with an opening in the middle to get access to the membrane from the back side.
For  one chip without the covering glass we calibrated the membrane deflection d in its  center versus applied external pressure ΔP.
It was found that ΔP = Ad+Bd3 where A =  2.03 bar/µm and B = 0.27 bar/µm3.
This relation can be used to estimate the pressure  in the chamber if d is known.
Short square voltage pulses were applied to the electrodes.
The response of the system  was observed with a homemade stroboscope25 and with a vibrometer (Polytec MSA- 400).
In the latter case it was possible to observe the process from the top (via glass)  or from the bottom focusing the laser beam ( = 633 nm)  with a diameter of 1.5 µm on  the membrane.
First, we measured the membrane deflection due to applied voltage  pulses from the back side.
For this configuration the change of the refractive index of  the liquid due to different reasons (dissolved gas, heating, pressure change) does not  influence the signal of the interferometer.
Bubbles with the radius r > /2π appearing in  the chamber can scatter the light because the membrane is transparent.
To eliminate  their effect on the signal we focused the laser beam on the opaque electrode.
With  these precautions we can be sure that the measured signal corresponds to the velocity  of the membrane about 10 µm off its center (see Supplementary Fig. S1).4  Electrochemical cell.
To achieve a significant actuation stroke in a short time we have  to produce a large amount of gas.
For this a large current through the chamber is  needed.
An electrochemical cell supports a large current in the ohmic regime when  the  current I and voltage U are related as26 I ≈ (U – E0)/R. Here E0 is the water dissociation  potential and R is the resistance of the cell.
Both of the parameters are defined by the  cell and it was already noted7 that for microsystems these parameters are considerably  larger than for macrocells.
For example, the  I – U curve for one of our sample  (see  Supplementary Fig. S2) corresponds to E0 = 2.8 V and R = 3.7 k.
Therefore, to run  the actuation fast we need a larger voltage than usually used for electrolysis.
In our  experiments we used AP pulses with the amplitude U = 5 – 10 V.
The average current density for our chips is around 200 A cm-2.
It results in a very high  relative supersaturation S > 1000 nearby the electrode surface.
When S is so large the  bubbles nucleate homogeneously and exist in the form of nanobubbles during 100 µs or  so7.
For single polarity electrolysis the bubbles finally grow to a well visible microscopic  size, but for AP electrolysis only small number of microbubbles is observed if the  switching frequency is larger than 20 kHz (see6 and Supplementary Fig. S3).
Some  additional information and estimates are given in Supplementary Information.
Let us  note that for macroscopic electrolytic cells observed on a long-time scale27 the maximal  current density is ~1 A cm-2 and maximal supersaturation is ~100.
Membrane deflection.
For AP voltage pulses with the amplitude U = ±10 V repeated  with the frequency f = 50 kHz (driving or switching frequency) during τ = 600 µs the  signal and current are shown in Fig. 2.
The signal consists of separate narrow lines of  increasing amplitude correlated with the driving pulses.
It is well visible in Fig. 2d  where only five periods for both the signal and current are shown in the same plot.
The  signal in Fig. 2a integrated over time t is the deflection of the membrane d(t).
It is  shown in Fig. 2c.
The deflection increases with time finally reaching a steady state while  oscillations with the driving frequency f are superimposed on the smooth curve (see5  enlarged view in Fig. 2e).
In its maximum the deflection becomes as high as d ≈ 1.4 µm  that corresponds to the pressure increase in the chamber ΔP ≈ 3.6 bar.
When the electrochemical process is switched off the pressure drops very fast (see Fig.  2c).
This is our key observation that opens the way for a closed actuation cycle.
A huge  amount of gas disappears in 100 µs or so.
The maximal deflection of the membrane  corresponds to the apparent  volume of gas ΔV = 0.7×104 µm3 at the pressure P ≈ 4.6  bar.
As the pressure is reduced back to normal this gas has to fill 60% of the chamber  but no gas is visible.
The actual amount of gas is much larger.
This is because most of  the gas is densely packed in nanobubbles (see6,7 and estimates in Supplementary  Information).
Only small amount of gas can be dissolved in the chamber to saturate the  liquid.
Diffusion out of the chamber via the filling channels is negligible on this  timescale.
Moreover, the gas produced by the single polarity electrolysis, when  hydrogen and oxygen are separated in space (appear near different electrodes), is well  visible and exists on a longer timescale (see Supplementary Fig. S3).
The only  reasonable explanation of the observed fast pressure decrease is consumption of the  gases in the overall reaction of water formation.
We cannot separate elementary steps  in this reaction but the process is not catalytic.
In 600 µs the gases diffuse too far away  from the electrodes (a few µm) to be consumed in surface reactions in 100 µs.
Discussion  Our interpretation of the physical events presented in Fig. 2 is the following.
Stoichiometric nanobubbles that are formed nearby the electrode surface in phase with  the electrical pulses6 are responsible for the sharp peaks in Fig. 2a and 2d.
Previously  we observed periodic reduction of gas concentration in the electrolyte above the  electrodes6.
Here we can see that in the closed chamber the process is accompanied  also by the periodic variation of the pressure.
This is an independent argument that the  combustion reaction happens in the nanobubbles.
The monotonic pressure increase in  Fig. 2c is due to the gas existing as separate hydrogen and oxygen nanobubbles and  dissolved molecules.
The nanobubbles are formed homogeneously and very fast6  because the local supersaturations is high.
For each period more gas is produced than  consumed while a steady state is not reached.
In the steady state a part of the  produced gas disappears in correlation with the driving pulses (high frequency  oscillation).
The rest of gas gets into the reaction independently on the electrical pulses  (randomly) by formation of stoichiometric nanobubbles in the solution.
This random  process is responsible for the fast decrease of the pressure after the switch off.
The  details of this interpretation can change, but the solid fact – the fast pressure decrease  – has to be related to the reaction between H2 and O2. Thermal effect.
The deflection of the membrane demonstrates dependence on the  driving frequency f as shown in Fig. 3a.
The higher the frequency the smaller amount of  gas escapes the reaction resulting in a smaller increase of pressure.
For this reason the  heat produced by the combustion reaction must increase with f.   On the contrary, the  Joule heating does not depend on f.
This is a clear experimental signature to distinct  between the two sources of heating.
To see the thermal effect we observe variations of  the electrolyte conductivity similar to that for any resistive sensor.
We fit each current  pulse (half of a period)  with the function7   I(t) = IF + I1 e-kt , where IF is the Faraday  current and the second term (parameters I1 and k) describes surface charge-discharge  processes28.
Figure 3b shows the Faraday current as a function of time for different  frequencies.
The current increase with time demonstrates the effect of heating.
Faster  increase for higher frequencies shows that at least a part of the total heat is produced  by the reaction.
Observation of the heating became possible due to small thermal mass  of the membrane.
To estimate an effective temperature in the chamber we measured (using METTLER  TOLEDO SevenMulti) the conductivity of the bulk solution, σ = σ0(1+αΔT), as a function  of the temperature increase ΔT  to find σ0 = 15 -1m-1 at T = 20 ˚C and α = 0.024 K-1.
Independently α = 0.024±0.001 K-1 was determined from our samples using external  heating.
The temperature dependence of the Faraday current was used to extract  information on the effective temperature (see inset in Fig. 3b).
The temperature7  determined in this way is closer to the maximal temperature than to the average one  because the most significant contribution to the current comes from the hottest regions  around the electrodes.
Our built-in thermal sensors were not fast enough to measure  the temperature change on the time scale 100 µs presumably due to parasitic  electrical  effects.
Even for very high supersaturation the homogeneous nucleation is still an activation  process.
Heating increases the nucleation rate including the bubbles containing only H2  or O2 gases.
Because more unreacted gas appears in the chamber the pressure has to  increase faster.
This effect is responsible for faster than linear increase of d(t) in Figure  3a.
A similar behavior has to be observed when the external temperature increases.
To  see this effect one chip was glued to a flat resistive heater and calibrated with a  thermocouple.
This configuration was observed from the top.
The vibrometer results  were equivalent to that observed from the bottom except of occasional scattering on  microbubbles appearing more often at low frequencies or high currents.
The results  shown in  Fig. 4a demonstrate significant dependence of the deflection on temperature.
Scattering on microbubbles is visible as some irregularity for the curve at T= 30 ˚C.  Actuation frequency.
The dynamics of cooling was observed by applying two series of  driving pulses separated by a delay time.
The membrane deflection is shown in Figure  4b.
The first series of pulses 100 µs long heats up the system.
The second series is  started when the temperature nearby the electrodes is augmented resulting in a larger  deflection than the first one.
When the delay between the series of pulses increases the  effect fades away.
The same experiment demonstrates how fast the membrane can be  actuated using series of pulses separated in time (see also Supplementary Fig. S4).
From our data it follows that cyclic operation with an actuation frequency of F = 5 kHz is  feasible and at this frequency the actuator is able to deliver the overpressure on the  level of 1 bar.
Small increase in the external temperature can increase both the  actuation frequency and the developed force.
The maximal stoke can be reached for the  minimal driving frequency around f = 20 kHz, however, for small f degradation of8  electrodes is observed6 and the optimal driving frequency is a matter of durability and  material choice.
Of course, the actuation with the driving frequency F = f  ~ 100 kHz is  also possible but with a smaller amplitude (pressure).
In conclusion, the results reported in this paper not only demonstrate a fast and strong  actuator that can be applied in microfluidics, micro/nano positioning, or in compact  sound/ultrasound  emitters.
More  importantly,  they  demonstrate  feasibility  of  combustion reactions in microscopic volumes.
This is a fundamental statement that  opens up new possibilities to power micro and mini systems.
1.  Abhari, F., Jaafar, H., & Yunus, N. A. M. A comprehensive study of micropumps  technologies. Int. J. Electrochem.
Sci. 7, 9765-9780 (2012).
2.  Ashraf, M. W., Tayyaba, S., & Afzulpurkar, N. Micro electromechanical systems  (MEMS) based microfluidic devices for biomedical applications. Int. J. Mol.
Sci.12, 3648- 3704 (2011). 3.
Maruta, K. Micro and mesoscale combustion. Proc. Combust. Inst.
33, 125-150  (2011).
4.  Veser, G. Experimental and theoretical investigation of H2 oxidation in a high- temperature catalytic microreactor. Chem.
Eng. Sci. 56, 1265-1273 (2001).
5.  Fernandez-Pello, A.C. Micro-power generation using combustion: issues and  approaches. Proc. Combust. Inst. 29, 883-899 (2002).
6.  Svetovoy, V. B., Sanders, R. G. P., Lammerink, T. S. J. & Elwenspoek, M. C.  Combustion of hydrogen-oxygen mixture in electrochemically generated nanobubbles. Phys.
Rev. E 84, 035302(R) (2011).
7.  Svetovoy, V. B., Sanders, R. G. P. & Elwenspoek, M. C. Transient nanobubbles in  short-time electrolysis. J. Phys.: Cond. Matter. 25, 184002 (2013). 8.
Seddon, J. R. T., Lohse, D., Ducker, W. A. & Craig, V. S. J. A deliberation on  nanobubbles at surfaces and in bulk. Chem. Phys.
Chem. 13, 2179-2187 (2012).
9.  Brenner,  M. P. & Lohse, D. Dynamic equilibrium mechanism for surface  nanobubble stabilization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 214505 (2008). 10.
Ducker, W. A. Contact angle and stability of interfacial nanobubbles.
Langmuir  25, 8907-8910 (2009). 11.
Seddon, J. R. T., Zandvliet, H. J.W. & Lohse, D. Knudsen gas provides  nanobubble stability. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 116101 (2011). 12.
Weijs, J. H. & Lohse, D. Why surface nanobubbles live for hours. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 054501 (2013). 13.
Weiss, L. Power production from phase change in MEMS and micro devices, a  review. Int. J. Therm.
Sci. 50, 639-647 (2011).9  14.
De Volder, M., & Reynaerts, D. Pneumatic and hydraulic microactuators: a  review. J. Micromech.
Microeng. 20, 043001 (2010). 15.
Pelrine, R., Kornbluh, R., Pei, Q. & Joseph, J. High-speed electrically actuated  elastomers with strain greater than 100%.
Science 287, 836-839 (2000). 16.
Brochu, P. & Pei, Q. B. Advances in dielectric elastomers for actuators and  artificial muscles. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 31, 10-36 (2010). 17.
Shian, S., Diebold, R. M. & Clarke, D. R. Tunable lenses using transparent  dielectric elastomer actuators.
Optics Express 21, 8669-8676 (2013). 18.
Neagu, C. R., Gardeniers, J. G. E., Elwenspoek, M. C. & Kelly, J. J. An  electrochemical microactuator: principle and first results.
J. Microelectromechan. Syst. 5, 2-9 (1996).
19.  Cameron, C. G., & Freund, M. S.
Electrolytic actuators: alternative, high  performance, material-based devices. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 99, 7827-7831  (2002).
20.  Hua, S. Z., Sachs, F., Yang, D. X. & Chopra, H. D. Microfluidic actuation using  electrochemically generated bubbles. Anal. Chem.
74, 6392-6396 (2002). 21.
Ateya, D. A., Shah, A. A., & Hua, S. Z.
An electrochemically actuated  micropump. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75, 915-920 (2004). 22.
Meng, D. D. & Kim, C. J. Micropumping of liquid by directional growth and  selective venting of gas bubbles.
Lab Chip 8, 958-968 (2008). 23.
Kjeang, E., Djilali, N. & Sinton, D. Microfluidic fuel cells: a review.
J. Power  Sources 186, 353-369 (2009). 24.
Li, P.-Y., Sheybani, R., Gutierrez, C. A., Kuo, J. T. W. & Meng, E. A parylene  bellows electrochemical actuator.
J. Microelectromechan.
S. 19, 215-228 (2010). 25.
Van den Broek, D. M. & Elwenspoek, M. Bubble nucleation in an explosive micro- bubble actuator . J. Micromech.
Microeng. 18, 064003 (2008). 26.
Shen, M., Bennett, N., Ding, Y. & Scott, K. A concise model for evaluating water  electrolysis. Int.
J. Hydrogen Energy 36, 14335-14341 (2011). 27.
Vogt, H. & Balzer, R. J. The bubble coverage of gas-evolving electrodes in  stagnant electrolytes. Electrochem.
Acta 50, 2073 (2005). 28.
A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods (Wiley, New York, USA  1980).
Acknowledgements   Funding was provided by the Dutch Technology Foundation (STW).
We thank D. Lohse  for numerous discussions, J. W. Berenschot for discussion of fabrication issues,  and H.  van Wolferen for technical assistance.
Author Contributions   V. B. S. performed experiments and analysis; R. G. P. S. contributed to measurements  and development of the setup; K. M. contributed to the device fabrication; M. C. E.  contributed to the analysis; both V. B. S. and M. C. E. contributed to the writing of the  paper.
All authors were involved in discussions.10  Additional information   Supplementary information accompanies this paper at  http://www.nature.com/scientificreports   Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Figure1 | Design of the chip.
a, A silicon wafer with a SiRN layer on top is bonded  with a structured glass wafer.
b, Optical image of the chamber in the device before  filling.
The membrane (highlighted with green light from the bottom) is not completely  etched, but normally it coincides with the size of the chamber.
Under the central  electrodes a thermal sensor (polysilicon) is visible.
c, General design of the chip:  in/outlets, long channels, and six contact pads (2 for the electrodes and 4 for the  sensor).
d, Completely functioning device glued to a PCB, sealed and wire bonded.11    Figure 2 | Deflection of the actuator membrane measured from the back side.
The membrane is driven by AP voltage pulses U = ±10 V, f = 50 kHz, and τ = 600 µs.   a, Velocity of the membrane (raw signal of the vibrometer).
b, Current flowing through  the electrodes.
c, Deflection of the membrane (raw signal integrated over time).
d,  Five last periods of the signal in a and the current in b are shown in the same plot.
e,  Five last periods in the membrane deflection.12    Figure 3 | Heating due to combustion of gases.
a, Deflection of the membrane for  different driving frequencies (U = ±9 V, τ = 350 µs).
b, The Faraday current as a  function of time for the runs presented in a (one point per period).
The inset shows the  effective temperature (smoothed) in the chamber.
Different colors correspond to the  frequencies shown in a.13    Figure 4 | Influence of heating on the actuator performance.
a, Membrane  deflection for different external temperatures (U = ±10 V, f = 100 kHz, τ = 400 µs, low  current sample).
b, Membrane deflection for two successive series of pulses 100 µs long  each separated by different delay times.
For the curves 1, 2 , 3, and 4 the delay is 100,  200, 400, 600 µs, respectively.
Supplementary Information      New type of microengine using internal combustion of  hydrogen and oxygen  Vitaly B. Svetovoy*1,2, Remco G. P. Sanders1, Kechun Ma1 & Miko C. Elwenspoek1,3  1MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, PO 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The  Netherlands (v.svetovoy@utwente.nl)  2 Institute of Physics and Technology, Yaroslavl Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences,  150007,Yaroslavl, Russia   3 FRIAS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany        Supplementry Figures        Figure S1.
Optical images of the filled chamber made with the vibrometer.
a, Top  view through the glass wafer. b, Bottom view.
The membrane is buried 380 µm deep in the  silicon wafer.
A long-focus objective of the vibrometer is used for the image.
The red circle  shows position of the laser beam on the opaque electrode.
The white circle indicates the  center of the membrane. Figure S2.
Current-voltage characteristics of the microscopic electrochemical cell for one  of the samples (low current sample).
At U > 3 V it was not possible to neglect the heating by  the current.
The corresponding points were collected using the procedure similar to that used  for Fig. 3b.
Then the current was extrapolated linearly to t = 0 to exclude the effect of  heating.
The red line is the best fit with the function I = (U-E0)/R, where the parameters E0  and R were found from this fit.
The inset shows enlarged view for the points below 2 V.Figure S3.
Stroboscopic images of the chamber (flash is 10 µs long).
The top row is for  single polarity pulse with U = 8 V, τ = 0.2 ms.
The panels a, b, and c correspond to the  observation time t = 0, 0.2, 2 ms, respectively.
The gas forms well visible microbubbles that  coalesce with time and diffuse slowly.
The bottom row is for AP pulses with U = ±8 V, f = 100  kHz, τ = 0.8 ms.
The panels d, e, and f correspond to t =0, 0.8, 1.6 ms, respectively.
In the  bottom row the voltage was applied longer and the current was nearly 3 times higher  (different sample) than in the top row.
Nevertheless, the number of microbubbles is smaller  for AP pulses and they have different pattern.
The number of visible microbubble decreases  further with the increase of the driving frequency.
Nanobubbles can be seen in the image e as  a weak haze and they are on the edge of visibility. Figure S4.
Continuous series of pulses vs two series separated by a delay.
The runs  were for U = ±9 V, f =100 kHz and the chamber was observed from the top.
a, Deflection of  the membrane.
The blue curve corresponds to 300 µs long continuous series of pulses.
The  red curve is the response on the two series of pulses 200 µs and 100 µs long separated by  100 µs delay.
The red curve demonstrates possibility of actuation with a frequency of F = 5  kHz.
b, Faraday current for the runs given in a (one point per period).
The blue circles are for  the continuous series.
The red triangles are for the two series of pulses separated by a gap of  100 µs long.
Details of fabrication  In our design the electrodes and the thermal sensor underneath the electrodes are fabricated  directly on the membrane.
Here we provide some details of fabrication.
Silicon wafer was  covered with 530 nm of SiRN.
Half of micrometer of polysilicon was deposited on top of thenitride, which was doped with boron to a resistivity of around 2×10-5 Ω·m.
The polysilicon  layer was patterned to form a resistor as shown in Fig. S5a using the standard lithography  process and reactive ion etching.
For insulation of polysilicon from the electrodes and for good  bonding with the glass wafer the top layer (170 nm) of polysilicon was oxidized.
The  electrodes were deposited by sputtering.
A layer of Ti 10 nm thick was deposited for better  adhesion followed by 100 nm of platinum.
For patterning of metals the lift-off process has  been used.
The resulting structure on the membrane is shown schematically in Fig. S5b. Figure S5.
Design of the thermal sensor.
a, Polysilicon layer (top view).
b, Membrane,  electrodes, and polysilicon sensor (cross section).
To cover the polysilicon resistor smoothly without cracks before the sputtering we deposited  SiRN and wet etched it isotropically.
Nitride left in the inner corners and guaranteed smooth  covering with metals as shown in Fig. S6. Figure S6.
Covering of polisilicon resistor with Pt electrodes.
a, SEM image of the wire  resistor and electrodes.
b, Magnified image of the circled area demonstrates smooth coverage  of the polisilicon wire.
Supplementary Text  Let us estimate roughly how much gas exists in the chamber using as an example the data in  Fig. 2.
The total amount of gas molecules N produced by the electrochemical process is given  by the expression                                                               0 ), ( 4 3 t I dt e N F                                               (S1)  where e is the absolute value of the electron charge and the Faraday current IF(t) is  understood as a continuous function of time in the same sense as presented in Fig. 3b.
Extracting IF(t) from the data in Fig. 2b and taking the integral for τ = 600 µs we find N ≈  2.5×1013.
Let us assume for the moment that the gases cannot react and all the produced gas will stay  in the system.
At normal pressure this gas would fill 20V0, where V0 = 5×104 µm3 is the  nominal volume of the chamber.
This huge amount of gas is not observed and has to  disappear in some way.
Significant part of the produced gas disappears via stoichiometric nanobubbles formed nearby  the electrode surface.
This process is well documented in6,7 but for completeness let us repeat  and refine the physical arguments.
The first pulse (negative for definiteness) with the length  T/2 = 1/2f  = 10 µs produces H2 molecules above the working electrode.
During the time T/2  the molecules can diffuse away from the electrode on the distance  2 / DT lD  ,  where D =  4.5×10-9 m2 s-1 is the diffusion coefficient of hydrogen in water.
Numerically one has lD = 210  nm.
The number of molecules produced by the first pulse is                                                             , 4 2 e T I N F H                                                       (S2)  where IF = 6 mA is the current in the first pulse.
The density of gas molecules in the diffusion  layer of thickness lD is20 10 5 2 2    D H H l A N n cm-3,                                  (S3)  where A = 2000 µm2 is the area of the working electrode.
Comparing this estimate with the  saturated concentration of hydrogen 4.7×1017 cm-3 one finds the relative supersaturation S =  1000 averaged over the electrode surface.
Note that the pressure at the first pulse is still  close to the atmospheric pressure.
The current density is distributed nonhomogeneously and  locally S reaches even higher values.
With this level of supersaturation the bubbles nucleate  homogeneously and very fast.
The upper limit on the bubble size is 2r < lD = 210 nm, where r  is the bubble radius.
These small bubbles cannot be observed optically because they scatter  light very weakly.
The next pulse is positive and it produces oxygen above the working electrode.
For oxygen  one finds similar but somewhat smaller values: lD = 140 nm and S = 430.
Oxygen bubbles  also can be nucleated homogeneously but with high probability O2 molecules will diffuse in the  existing nanobubbles containing hydrogen.
In this way stoichiometric nanobubbles can be  formed.
In these bubbles the reaction happens spontaneously6 but the mechanism is still  unclear.
Disappearance of the stoichiometric nanobubbles in phase with driving pulses is  supported by observation of the gas density oscillations in Ref.
[6] and the membrane  oscillations in this study, among other arguments.
We can estimate the number of gas molecules in the chamber Nss when the steady state is  reached.
Let us assume that all gas is collected in nanobubbles of maximal radius r = 100 nm  (larger bubbles would be visible due to significant light scattering).
This gas can be described  by the gas law                                                             kT N V P P P ss L      0 ,                               (S4)  where P0 is the atmospheric pressure, ΔP = 3.6 bar is the overpressure in the chamber, and  PL = 2γ/r = 14 bar is the Laplace pressure for a bubble in water.
The increment of the volume  is estimated for the square 100×100 µm2 membrane with maximal deflection d0 = 1.5 µm as  ΔV = 0.7×104 µm3.
Since we took the largest radius for the bubbles, Eq. (S4) gives theestimate for the smallest number of gas molecules in the steady state, Nss > 3.1×1012.
According to Fig. 2c the pressure in the chamber is relaxed for 100 µs or so and without  reaction all this gas would fill 2.6V0.
Because the gas is not observed we conclude that it is  consumed in the reaction of water formation.