Subtractive 3D Printing of Optically Active Diamond Structures  Aiden A. Martin, Milos Toth *, and Igor Aharonovich §  School of Physics and Advanced Materials, University of Technology,  Sydney, P.O. Box 123, Broadway, New South Wales 2007, Australia     Abstract  Diamond has recently attracted considerable attention as a promising platform for quantum  technologies, photonics and high resolution sensing applications.
Here we demonstrate a  chemical approach that enables the fabrication of functional diamond structures using gas- mediated electron induced etching.
The method achieves chemical etching at room  temperature through the dissociation of surface-adsorbed H2O molecules by electron  irradiation in a water vapor environment.
High throughput, parallel processing is possible by  electron flood exposure and the use of an etch mask, while single step, mask-free three  dimensional fabrication and iterative editing are achieved using a variable pressure scanning  electron microscope.
The electron induced chemical etching paves the way to a  transformative technology for nanofabrication of diamond and other wide band-gap  semiconductors.
Diamond, long considered unconquerable due to its extraordinary strength and  chemical resistance, has found applications across numerous areas of science due to its  unique combination of optical, electronic, chemical and thermal properties1.
Most notably,  the nitrogen vacancy luminescence center (NV) has been employed as a spin qubit, enabling  the use of diamond as a platform for next generation sensing, nanopthotonic and quantum  devices2-8.
These tantalizing applications are, however, overshadowed by challenges in  fabrication arising from its extraordinary hardness and chemical resistance.
At present, diamond fabrication requires cumbersome masking techniques, and ion  bombardment or high power laser ablation which often causes damage and material  redeposition artifacts9-13.
Fabrication and editing of optoelectronic grade nanostructures is  therefore extremely limited relative to conventional semiconductors such as silicon and  gallium arsenide.
Furthermore, there is no robust technique for direct-write, deterministic  patterning of diamond that does not produce severe surface damage caused by ion  implantation and redeposition of non-volatile, sputtered or ablated material.
Here we demonstrate a chemical approach that enables the fabrication of functional diamond  structures using gas-mediated electron induced etching (Figure 1a).
The method achieves  chemical etching at room temperature through the dissociation of surface-adsorbed water  molecules by electron irradiation in a water vapor environment.
The process utilizes low  energy electrons which do not cause damage through knock-on displacement of carbon,  sputtering, and staining characteristic of reactive ion etching and focused ion beam  sputtering techniques.
High throughput, parallel processing is possible by electron flood  exposure and the use of an etch mask, while single step, mask-free three dimensional  fabrication and iterative editing are achieved using a variable pressure scanning electron  microscope.
The mask-free, electron beam induced etching (EBIE)14, 15 is used to realize  direct-write subtractive 3D printing of diamond nanostructures on inclined planes.
This  variant enables iterative editing and imaging of individual nanostructures.
The processes aredemonstrated using a standard variable pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM)  making diamond nanofabrication accessible to every nanotechnology laboratory in the  world.
Figure 1b-c shows the steps used to direct-write etch diamond.
The process involves  exposure of diamond to water vapor and concurrent irradiation with an electron beam,  giving rise to volatilization of carbon.16-18      Figure 1.
Schematic illustrations of H2O mediated electron beam induced etching.
a Direct- write subtractive printing of diamond.
b-c Volatilization of diamond by electron exposure in  a gaseous H2O environment.
To demonstrate the applicability of EBIE to device fabrication, we start by fabricating a  pillar from a single crystal diamond using an etch mask.
Pillars are used as antennas that  enhance light extraction from the embedded emitters, particularly of high refractive index  semiconductors.
The EBIE process is shown schematically in Figure 2a-c.
The mask must  either absorb the incident electrons or prevent H2O from adsorbing to the diamond  substrate.
Here we use a silica mask to prevent low-energy (2 keV) electrons from  penetrating into underlying regions of diamond.
The resulting pillars (Figure 2d) have high  aspect ratios and straight side-walls, making them ideal for photonic applications.
The  minimum pillar diameter is ultimately limited by the diameter of the interaction volume of a  delta function electron beam, which scales super-linearly19  with electron energy.
In  diamond, it is equal to ~ 19 nm at 2 keV, and ~ 9 nm at 1 keV, as shown in Figure 2e.20  Nanostructures can therefore be fabricated with high resolution using the correct  combination of mask diameter and electron energy.
On the other hand, micron sized depths  can be achieved, enabling high aspect ratio geometries. Figure 2.
Diamond pillar fabricated by mask-based EBIE.
a - c Schematic illustration of  pillar fabrication by H2O mediated EBIE.
a Silica bead on a diamond surface.
b Diamond  volatilization achieved by scanning a 2 keV electron beam over a rectangle repeatedly in a  H2O environment.
The silica bead acts as an etch mask that prevents the electrons from  reaching the diamond surface.
c Final pillar geometry after the silica bead was removed  from the substrate.
d Electron image of a pillar fabricated in single crystal diamond by H2O- mediated EBIE using the process shown in a - c. e Depth and diameter of the electron  interaction volume that contains 90% of the energy deposited into diamond, plotted as a  function of electron energy.
The values were calculated using a Monte Carlo model of  electron-solid interactions.
Optical properties of the pillars are shown by the fluorescence and Raman scattering data in  Figure 3.
PL spectra were recorded using a confocal microscope with a 532 nm excitation  laser.
The PL intensity of the pillar (Figure 3a) shows a two fold increase over the  neighboring, at, unprocessed region of diamond (under identical PL collection conditions).
Raman spectroscopy (Figure 3b) shows no evidence of graphitic inclusions in the irradiated  area with the first-order diamond peak positioned at 1332 cm-1 and FWHM of ~ 3.6 cm-1,  consistent with the Raman signature of pristine, single crystal diamond21, 22.Figure 3.
Optical quality of a diamond pillar fabricated by EBIE.
a Photoluminescence  spectra of the pillar and an adjacent, unprocessed region of diamond.
b Raman spectrum of  the pillar showing the absence of defects generated by EBIE.
Next, we demonstrate the unparalleled capability of EBIE for mask-free editing of inclined  diamond surfaces.
Editing of multiple inclined facets is nearly impossible by mask-based  processing techniques, including electron- and photo-lithography.
To demonstrate the three  dimensional capability of writing on inclined surfaces, we patterned the letters `UTS' and  `NANO' into individual microparticles (Figure 4) simply by tracing out the letters using an  electron beam as shown schematically in Figure 1d.
Etching was carried out using a 20 keV  electron beam, while charging was stabilized using a low vacuum (13 Pa) environment of  H2O.
The letters are clearly visible in SEM images (Figure 4a), while atomic force  microscope (AFM) maps of the `UTS' logo show line widths and depths of ~ 100 nm  (Figure 4b).
The letters `NANO' were written intentionally across three diamond (111)  facets, showing the ability of EBIE to edit three dimensional, inclined nanostructures.
Figure  4c shows an individual diamond microparticle with visible (111) facets and Figure 4e shows  the word `NANO' imprinted in the crystal, with the letters `NA', `N' and `O', occupying all  three (111) planes, respectively.
PL measurements recorded from the diamond  microparticles exhibit strong fluorescence, confirming that the etch process does not destroy  optical properties and material functionality.
The mask-less patterning approach is  particularly attractive for generation of high resolution microfluidic channels in  microdiamond crystals, in a close proximity to optical emitters.23, 24Figure 4.  Beam-directed editing of Si-doped diamond micro-particles.
a SEM image of the  symbol `UTS' patterned by H2O mediated EBIE on the 110 plane of a single diamond micro- particle embedded in platinum.
b AFM image of the symbol `UTS' shown in a (depth of  each letter ~ 100 nm).
c SEM image of a diamond micro-particle.
d Schematic illustration of  the process used to pattern the micro-particle shown in c. Each letter of `NANO' was  patterned individually using H2O mediated EBIE on three different 111 faces of diamond.
e  SEM image of the microparticle shown in c after the letters `NANO' were patterned by  EBIE.
The potential of EBIE exceeds that of traditional etching techniques for wide bandgap  semiconductors.
For instance, a combination of EBIE with cathodoluminescence analysis  techniques may enable probing of the spectroscopic properties of nanostructures while the  etch parameters are modified during fabrication.
Alternatively, substrate tilting can enable  fabrication of undercut structures that are currently not available in diamond.
Finally, the  EBIE method will be pivotal for realizing hybrid devices when direct sculpting of a  nanostructure is required to achieve close proximity with an external cavity or metallic  nanostructure25.
We have demonstrated a novel, promising approach to pattern and sculpt optically active  diamond structures using two variants of H2O-mediated electron induced chemical etching:  a scalable, mask-based lithographic approach, and an extremely versatile, direct- write  editing process.
For the first time, direct 3D writing is realized on various facets of a single  microparticle.
PL and Raman analysis were used to show that the unique optical properties  of diamond are maintained and no graphitization occurs.
By leveraging the advanced  functionalities provided by a conventional SEM in conjunction with EBIE a modification to  existing devices and direct nanofabrication for rapid prototyping is enabled.
The realized  electron induced chemical etching paves the way to a transformative technology for  nanofabrication of diamond structures and other wide band-gap semiconductors.
It is thefirst step towards rendering 3D single crystal diamond geometries for high performance  photonic, sensing and quantum devices.
Acknowledgements This work was partly funded by FEI Company.
A.A.M. is the recipient of a John Stocker  Postgraduate Scholarship from the Science and Industry Endowment Fund.
I.A. is the  recipient of an Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Research Award  (Project Number DE130100592).
Correspondence to: milos.toth@uts.edu.au  or igor.aharonovich@uts.edu.au     References  1.  Wort, C.J.H. & Balmer, R.S. Diamond as an electronic material.
Materials Today 11,  22-28 (2008).
2.  Kaufmann, S. et al. Detection of atomic spin labels in a lipid bilayer using a single- spin nanodiamond probe.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110,  10894-10898 (2013).
3.  Maletinsky, P. et al. A robust scanning diamond sensor for nanoscale imaging with  single nitrogen-vacancy centres.
Nat Nano 7, 320-324 (2012).
4.  Riedrich-Moller, J. et al. One- and two-dimensional photonic crystal microcavities in  single crystal diamond.
Nature Nano. 7, 69-74 (2012).
5.  Zhu, X. et al. Coherent coupling of a superconducting flux qubit to an electron spin  ensemble in diamond.
Nature 478, 221-224 (2011).
6.  Dobrovitski, V.V., Fuchs, G.D., Falk, A.L., Santori, C. & Awschalom, D.D.  Quantum Control over Single Spins in Diamond.
Annual Review of Condensed  Matter Physics 4, 23-50 (2013).
7.  Childress, L. & Hanson, R. Diamond NV centers for quantum computing and  quantum networks.
MRS Bulletin 38, 134-138 (2013).
8.  Andrei, F. et al. Quantum photonic devices in single-crystal diamond.
New Journal  of Physics 15, 025010 (2013).
9.  Burek, M.J. et al. Free-Standing Mechanical and Photonic Nanostructures in Single- Crystal Diamond. Nano lett. (2012).
10.  Hausmann, B.J.M. et al. Integrated High-Quality Factor Optical Resonators in  Diamond. Nano lett. (2013). 11.
Aharonovich, I. et al. Homoepitaxial Growth of Single Crystal Diamond Membranes  for Quantum Information Processing. Adv. Mater.
24, OP54-OP59 (2012). 12.
Tao, Y. & Degen, C. Facile Fabrication of Single-Crystal-Diamond Nanostructures  with Ultrahigh Aspect Ratio. Adv. Mater.
25, 3962-3967 (2013). 13.
Bayn, I., Meyler, B., Salzman, J. & Kalish, R. Triangular nanobeam photonic  cavities in single-crystal diamond.
New Journal of Physics 13, 025018 (2011).14.  Utke, I., Moshkalev, S. & Russell, P. Nanofabrication Using Focused Ion and  Electron Beams.
(Oxford University Press, New  York, 2012).
15.  Randolph, S.J., Fowlkes, J.D. & Rack, P.D. Focused, Nanoscale Electron-Beam- Induced Deposition and Etching.
Critical Reviews in Solid State and Materials  Sciences 31, 55-89 (2006). 16.
Martin, A.A., Phillips, M.R. & Toth, M. Dynamic Surface Site Activation: A Rate  Limiting Process in Electron Beam Induced Etching.
ACS Applied Materials &  Interfaces 5, 8002-8007 (2013). 17.
Taniguchi, J., Miyamoto, I., Ohno, N. & Honda, S. Electron Beam Assisted  Chemical Etching of Single Crystal Diamond Substrates.
Japanese Journal of  Applied Physics 35, 6574. 18.
Niitsuma, J.-i., Yuan, X.-l., Koizumi, S. & Sekiguchi, T. Nanoprocessing of  Diamond Using a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope.
Japanese  Journal of Applied Physics 45, L71. 19.
Kanaya, K. & Okayama, S. Penetration and energy-loss theory of electrons in solid  targets.
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 5, 43 (1972). 20.
Hovington, P., Drouin, D. & Gauvin, R. CASINO: A new monte carlo code in C  language for electron beam interaction —part I: Description of the program.
Scanning 19, 1-14 (1997). 21.
Magyar, A. et al. Fabrication of Thin, Luminescent, Single-crystal Diamond  Membranes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 081913 (2011). 22.
Orwa, J.O., Nugent, K.W., Jamieson, D.N. & Prawer, S. Raman investigation of  damage caused by deep ion implantation in diamond. Phys.
Rev. B 62, 5461-5472  (2000). 23.
Ziem, F.C., Götz, N.S., Zappe, A., Steinert, S. & Wrachtrup, J. Highly Sensitive  Detection of Physiological Spins in a Microfluidic Device. Nano lett.
13, 4093-4098  (2013). 24.
Ohashi, K. et al. Negatively Charged Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in a 5 nm Thin 12C  Diamond Film. Nano lett.
13, 4733-4738 (2013). 25.
Benson, O. Assembly of hybrid photonic architectures from nanophotonic  constituents.
Nature 480, 193-199 (2011).
26.  Danilatos, G.D. Foundations of environmental scanning electron microscopy. Adv. Electron. Electron Phys. 71, 109-250 (1988). 27.
Thiel, B.L. et al. Two-stage gas amplifier for ultrahigh resolution low vacuum  scanning electron microscopy.
Review of Scientific Instruments 77, - (2006). 28.
Toth, M. & Phillips, M.R. Monte Carlo modeling of cathodoluminescence generation  using electron energy loss curves.
Scanning 20, 425-432 (1998). 29.
Nečas, D. & Klapetek, P. Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis.
Central European Journal of Physics 10, 181-188 (2012).