Tungsten Boride: a 2D Multiple Dirac Semimetal for   Hydrogen Evolution Reaction  Aizhu Wang1,2, Lei Shen3, Mingwen Zhao4*, Junru Wang4, Weifeng Li4, Weijia Zhou1,  Yuanping Feng5*, and Hong Liu1,6*  1Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, 250022,  China  2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Department of Physics, National  University of Singapore, Singapore, 117579, Singapore  3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Science Programme, Faculty of  Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117575, Singapore  4School of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan  250100, Shandong, China  5Department of Physics & Centre for Advanced Two-dimensional Materials, National University  of Singapore, Singapore, 117542, Singapore  6State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, Shandong,  China        *Correspondences:  zmw@sdu.edu.cn (M. Z.) phyfyp@nus.edu.sg (Y. F.)  hongliu@sdu.edu.cn (H. L.)TOC      HIGHLIGHTS  2D WB4 is first theoretical studied as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction.
The 2D “sandwich” B-W-B lattice intrinsically possesses multiple Dirac states for facilitating the  transmission of electrons.
The optimized catalyst shows an ultralow overpotential to realize its ideal catalytic characteristics.
The d band center regulated by the p-orbitals of borophene subunits is the main driving force for  achieving higher activity.
High Pt-like HER activity of the host is essential to offer a guiding principle for discovering  optimal noble-metal-free catalysts.
SUMMARY Here, we propose a two-dimensional (2D) tungsten boride (WB4) lattice, with the Gibbs free  energy for the adsorption of atomic hydrogen (ΔGH) tending to be the ideal value (0 eV) at 3%  strained state, to host a better hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity.
Based on first-principles  calculations, it is demonstrated that the multiple d-p-π and d-p-σ Dirac conjugations of WB4 lattice  ensures its excellent electronic transport characteristics.
Meanwhile, coupling with the d-orbitals  of W, the p-orbitals of borophene subunits in WB4 lattice can modulate the d band center to get a  good HER performance.
Our results not only provide a versatile platform for hosting multiple  Dirac semimetal states with a “sandwich” configuration, but also offer a guiding principle for  discovering the relationship between intrinsic properties of the active center and the catalytic  activity of metal layer from the emerging ﬁeld of 2D noble-metal-free lattices.
Context & Scale  Efficient hydrogen production (H2) from water could potentially lead to a clean and renewable  energy system.
Electrochemical water splitting to produce H2 offers a reliable and sustainable  solution for this purpose.
The catalysts are important components of water electrolysis cells and  largely govern their performance.
Considering the high price and limited world-wide supply of Pt- based HER catalysts, the development of non-noble-metal and high activity hydrogen-producing  catalysts plays a central role in the current research progress.
In this work, we propose a 2D WB4 lattice, with the ΔGH tending to be the ideal value (0 eV) at  3% strained state, host a better HER activity than that in Pt (ΔGH ~ -0.05 eV).
Based on first- principles calculations, we present a systematic theoretical study for the WB4 lattice with special  emphasis on the configuration design and electronic structure, and find that the WB4 lattice spawns  multiple Dirac cones around the Fermi level with considerable fermi velocities to transfer electrons  in all directions throughout its structure.
Importantly, together with the d-orbitals of W, the p- orbitals of borophene subunits in WB4 lattice can modulate the d band center to get a good HER  performance by regulating external stress.
This work provides new insight into the rational design  and manipulation of 2D catalysts toward electrochemical hydrogen production and other  electroreduction reactions with high selectivity.
INTRODUCTION When powered by renewable energy sources, the generation of hydrogen from the electrolysis of  water is a means to produce a high-energy density, mobile energy carrier without any associated  carbon dioxide emissions [1].
At low temperatures, this process can take place in a series of  electrochemical devices, ranging from high-current-density polymer electrolyte membrane  electrolyzers [2-4] to low-current-density, solar-driven photoelectrochemical cells [5-7].
For all  those water-splitting applications, the choice of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalyst  employed at the cathode can have a profound influence on the cost, lifetime, and efficiency of the  device.
Pt is a very active and commonly used HER catalyst, but its high price and limited world- wide supply [1, 8] make its use a barrier to mass production of H2 by water electrolysis.
The effective approach to overcome the challenges associated with Pt HER catalysts is to increase  the surface to bulk atomic ratio of Pt, thus allowing for a lower metal loading to be used without  compromising electrolysis efficiency [1].
Many efforts have really been devoted both  experimentally and theoretically in the past few years.
For example, chemical treatments [9-11],  such as surface modification, alloying, heteroatom doping and so on.
Another approach that works  is completely replacing Pt with alternative non-Pt catalysts.
Such as transition metal alloys,  sulfides, carbides, nitrides, and borides, etc. [12-16].
Hence, a prerequisite is gaining detailed  knowledge of structure-activity correlations for electrode materials to better understand the activity  trends and then rapidly discovering new advanced catalysts for HER.
Sitting around carbon in the periodic table, boron is a magic element in the sense that it not only  can bond both covalently and ionically [17], but it is capable of forming a great variety of pure  allotropes ranging from zero-dimensional clusters to three-dimensional (3D) bulk materials [18- 21], suggesting that boron share many of the characteristic of carbon.
Advanced research  demonstrated that several 3D boride compounds consists of two-dimensional (2D) boron layers as  subunits (known as borophene subunits), have recently emerged as a potential new frontier for  searching better HER catalysts [22-24], which can be contributed as the strongly bound of  borophene subunits within the solid in contrast to the weakly bound graphene layer in graphite.
However, the research on the HER activity of 2D borophene subunits is still a blank.
Here, the 2D tungsten boride (WB4) lattice (Figure 1(a)) is proposed, in which a triangular  tungsten layer is sandwiched by two borophene subunits, forming a “sandwich” layer.
Based on  first-principles calculations, we find that the WB4 lattice has superior stability and multiple Dirac  cones due to the d-p-π and d-p-σ conjugations.
Moreover, our study demonstrates a different  principle to spur HER activity that can go beyond local site optimization by manipulating the d  band center within a certain strain range, as evidenced by an optimum Gibbs free energy of 2×2  WB4 nanosheet.
Our results, here, not only provide a versatile platform for hosting multiple Dirac  semimetal states with a “sandwich” configuration, but also offer a guiding principle for  discovering the relationship between intrinsic properties of the active center and the catalytic  activity of metal layer from the emerging ﬁeld of noble-metal-free lattices.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Characterization of WB4            Figure 1.
Physical Characterization of WB4  (A) Schematic representation of the 2D honeycomb tungsten boride (WB4).
The unit cell is  indicated by the yellow shaded area with the two basis vectors of a1 and a2.
(B) Simulated STM image for monolayer WB4.
Experimentally, the WB2 is found in the hexagonal phase within P6/mmm space group with few  freedom of atomic positions [25].
Only on this alone, WB4 monolayer can be naturally produced  through exfoliation of the nanosheet (Supplemental Information).
Figure 1A represents the topview and side view, respectively, of the optimized configuration, where the triangle lattice W  atoms are located above the center of the honeycomb graphene-like boron lattice from the top view,  form a “sandwich”.
The lengths are 1.706 Å, 2.371 Å and 2.955 Å for covalent B-B, ionic W-B  and metallic W-W bonds, respectively, and the optimized lattice constant is found to be 2.955 Å,  matching with the trigonal W lattice in WB2.
Then, the thermodynamic stability of the WB4 framework is confirmed by the phonon spectrum  calculated along the highly symmetric directions in BZ (Figure S3).
Clearly, the phonon spectrum  of WB4 lattice is free from imaginary frequencies, implying the thermodynamic stability of WB4  lattice.
By comparing the cleavage energy, it is verified that WB4 lattice is robust stable than WB2  in the process of synthetic 2D tungsten boride lattice.
So, it can be regarded as WB4 multilayers,  and a single layer of large dimensions is plausible in near future thanks to the well-developed  preparative technique (Supplemental Information).
To offer more reference information to the  experimental observation, the simulated STM image of WB4 monolayer is also displayed (Figure  1B). Figure 2.
Electrical Characterization of WB4  (A) Electronic band lines and the corresponding electronic density of states of WB4 in proximity  of the Fermi level (set to zero).
(B) The isosurfaces of the Kohn-Sham wave functions of degenerate points listed in (A).
Different  colors represent different bands in diff.
Excellent Electronical Transport Property The electronic properties including the band structure and corresponding projected electronic  density of states are presented (Figure 2A).
Based on density-functional theory (DFT) calculations,  two Dirac cones exist closely to the Fermi level (Ef), exhibiting the characteristic of semimetals.
By plotting the orbital-resolved band structures as well as the charge density distributions, it is  clearly seen that the Dirac bands are composed mainly of the p states of B atoms and the d states  of W atoms.
More specifically, bands I and II are from the coupling of px/y/z orbitals of B atoms  and the dz2/dx2-y2/dxy orbitals of W atoms, meanwhile, bands III and IV are mainly derived from the  coupling of pz orbital of B and W atoms, together with the dxz/dyz orbitals of W atom (Figure S4  and Figure S5). Figure 3.
Strain Response of the Semimetal State in WB4  Electronic band structure evolution of the 2D WB4 lattice with external strain along the xy- direction.
The energy at the Fermi level was set to zero.
Here, ‘‘-’’ represents the condition of  compressional strain.
Apart from the equalitarian state, we also investigate the robustness of semimetal states under  finite biaxial strain.
Figure 3 shows that the semimetal feature is robust against the stretching  along the xy-direction, but gradually converts into metal characteristic with abundant states around  Ef under the compressional condition, suggesting a different strain response of WB4.
The Fermi  velocity (νf) of the WB4 lattice was calculated by fitting those Dirac bands and achieved extreme  values at the equalitarian state, 0.72×106 m/s for band I, 0.54×106 m/s for band II and 0.61×106  m/s for bands III and IV (Supplemental Information).
The multiple Dirac states (different location,  origin and anisotropies/isotropies), together with their considerable fermi velocities, should enableWB4 monolayer to transfer electrons in all directions throughout its structure, suggesting its  excellent electronic transport property.
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction Activity The metallic property is favorable for the electron injection from a cathode to the catalyst surface,  where intermediate protons induced by water dissociation in alkaline solutions are reduced and  adsorbed on the catalyst-covered cathode [26].
Hence, we study electrocatalysis applications of  the Dirac semimetal lattice with high carrier mobility.
Both experimentally and theoretically, the  Volmer step is recognized as the rate-determining step for HER [27-29], so, the Gibbs free energy  of the adsorption atomic hydrogen (ΔGH) is the key operator to describe the HER activity [30].
Here, we adopt a (2×2) supercell of WB4 lattice to study its catalytic activity and find that the  bridge site is the most stable adsorption site (Figure 4A and Supplemental Information).
Therefore,  we will only focus on the bridge site hereafter. Figure 4.
Identification of Active Sites and HER Performance  (A and B) Schematic representation of (2×2) WB4 2D supercell with a hydrogen adsorption (A)  and the corresponding charge density difference before and after the adsorption (B).
The unit cell  is indicated by the yellow shaded area.(C) Gibbs free energy diagram of HER in strained states.
Blue and yellow represent charge loss  and charge accumulation, respectively.
The isosurface value is set to 0.002Å-3.   (D) Surface pourbaix diagrams.
The most thermodynamically stable states of the surface under  relevant USHE conditions and pH values are labeled by the terminations.
The optimized structures  of hydroxyl-terminated WB4 and oxygen-terminated WB4 were listed in the insert figure.
Oxygen  is represented by the red ball.
In order to elucidate the adsorption mechanism, we further analyze the charge transfer between  with and without the hydrogen adsorption, which is defined as ΔQ = Q(sub+H)-Q(sub)-Q(H),  where Q(sub+H), Q(sub) and Q(H) are the charge densities of the corresponding WB4 systems  with a hydrogen adsorption, the clean corresponding WB4 systems and a single hydrogen atom,  respectively.
As Figure 4B shown, charges can transfer between B and H atoms as well as the  nearest W atoms, providing a possible platform for catalytic reactions.
Formally, the charges are  mainly contributed by p-orbitals of B and d-orbitals of W (Figure S7 and Figure S8).
Quantitatively, the Bader charge analysis reveals that the hydrogen has a net gain of 2.32e from  the surrounding B and W atoms, exhibiting an excellent potential performance for HER activity.
Based on the PBE functional, we obtained the Gibbs free energy ΔGH = 0.06 eV for the above  WB4 nanosheet, indicating that the surface bridge site is catalytically active for HER.
Inspired by  the experimental stress effect on catalytic activity [31, 32], we investigated the biaxial strain effect  on the HER catalytic activity of WB4 lattice, and the related Gibbs free energies are calculated  (Figure 4C).
Interestingly, the ΔGH of WB4 nanosheet responds differently to the above- mentioned Dirac semimetal states.
For example, the stretch makes the WB4 nanosheet approaching  the ideal catalytic state (ΔGH ~ 0.00 eV) firstly, and then far away the state with further increased  stretch, suggesting that WB4 nanosheet has a good HER performance within a certain tensile strain.
Controlled d band Mechanisms  To analyze the origin of the catalytic activity evolution, we examined how the d-band center can  be modulate with the change of strain in WB4 nanosheet.
Considering the orbital hybridization  between W and W atoms (the distance ranges from 2.955 Å to 3.132 Å), the d-orbitals of four W  atoms are plotting (Figure 5) and their d-band centers are marked by black arrows.
According toFigure 5.
Evolution of d Band Center  The projected density of states for the d-orbitals of  W in the strained states.
The vertical black lines  correspond to the location of strained states with 3%  which has the highest catalytic activity.
The energy  at the Fermi level was set to zero.
the d-band theory, a lower d-band center results in weaker bonding between the catalyst and the  adsorbate [33].
Taking the zero-point energy (ZPE) and entropy into account, the relative catalytic  activity of WB4 (ΔGH) has similar evolutionary relationship with the d band center (Figure 4C,  Figure 5 and Figure S12).
The results can be attributed to the existence of B intermediate, which  are modulating the combination of W with H to make a mild catalytic reaction by changing the  coupling interactions between d-orbitals of W and p-orbitals of B.
The coupling interactions makes  the d-orbitals center of W shifting to a more negative value, resulting in a better catalytic activity.
Additionally, the desorption barrier (ΔGH ~ -0.06 eV) of 5% strained state equals the adsorptionbarrier (ΔGH ~ 0.06 eV) of 0% equalitarian state, so we can get the maximum adsorption and  desorption by manipulating a small external stress to get an ideal catalytic state.
Except the modulated d-band center, the excellent conductivity and Fermi velocity, induced by the  effect of Dirac cone with d-p-π and d-p-σ conjugations, also can guarantee fast electron transfer  on the process of electrochemical reactions.
Therefore, our results not only provide a guiding  principle for the discovery of Dirac semimetal catalyst with noble-metal-free “sandwich”  configuration, but also offer a universal description of the relationship between intrinsic properties  of the active center and the catalytic activity of metal layer, which are in line with new research  frontier in single-atom electrocatalysts [34-36].
High Thermal Stability The surface Pourbaix diagrams of the equalitarian (0%) and strained (3%) states are constructed  by plotting the thermodynamically most stable surface state under the relevant USHE and pH values  (Figure 4D).
In an acidic solution (pH = 0), negative USHE values (reducing environment) as low  as -2.14 and -2.43 V are required to protect the equalitarian state and strained state, respectively,  from oxidation by H2O. A more negative potential is necessary to protect the bare WB4 lattice at  high pH values with a slope of -0.059 V/pH. When the potential is above the cathodic protection  potential of the 2D WB4, water starts to oxidize and the WB4 is covered by one hydroxyl (OH*).
As the potential increases, the hydroxyls on WB4 will be oxidized, and the most stable O*- terminated WB4 will be formed.
The lowest USHE values for 2D WB4 with one O* termination are  0.03 V (0%) and -0.03 (3%) in an acidic solution.
Therefore, under standard conditions, the  strained state prefers to be terminated by O*, exhibits a better HER performance fitting with ΔGH  descriptor (Supplemental Information).
Hydrogen Coverage Effect in WB4 Finally, we explore the hydrogen coverage effect on the HER catalytic performance of the 0% and  3% states.
We define the coverage of hydrogen as the fraction of a monolayer with respect to the  number of available B-B bridge sites (12 sites) in the basal plane.
Here, we consider one (σ = 1/12),  two (σ =1/6), three (σ =1/4) and four (σ =1/3) hydrogen adsorption in 2×2 WB4 supercell and  calculate Gibbs free energies as summarized in Figure 6 and Supplemental Information.
As a  benchmark, we firstly calculate the HER performance of Pt with ΔGH = -0.05 eV, fitting well withother previous works [30, 34].
Interestingly, the variation of the Gibbs free energy is obvious with  the increase of H coverage, indicating that ΔGH is sensitive to the hydrogen coverage.
Typically,  the 3% strained state at σ =1/3 has a free energy of 0.02 eV, whose catalytic performance even  exceeds that of Pt.
Hence, considering the Pt-like activity for HER of WB4, a series of the 2D  noble-metal-free “sandwich” lattices should be promising materials to replace Pt or Pt compound  in other electrochemical and photoelectrochemical applications. Figure 6.
Evolution of ΔGH in Different Coverages  Gibbs free energy diagram of HER under different coverage at equilibrium potential.
As a  benchmark, the Gibbs free energy for Pt was calculated by the same strategy and listed here.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES  Computational Details of DFT Calculations  The first-principles calculations within density-functional theory (DFT) were implemented by the  Vienna ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) [37].
A generalized gradient approximation (GGA)  in the form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [38] was adopted to describe the electron-electron  interactions.
The energy cut-off employed for plane-wave expansion of electron wavefunctions  was set to 520 eV and the electron-ion interactions were treated using projector-augmented-wave  (PAW) potentials [39].
The DFT-D3 method was applied to include the long-range van der Waals  interaction for the adsorption on WB4 lattice [40].
The system was modeled by unit cells repeated  periodically on the x-y plane, while a vacuum region of 15 Å was applied along the z-direction to  avoid mirror interaction between neighboring images.
The Brillouin zone (BZ) integration was  sampled on a grid of 13×13×1 k-points for the unit cell and 7×7×1 k-points for the 2×2×1 supercell.
Structure optimization was carried out using a conjugate gradient (CG) method until the remaining  force on each atom is less than 0.05 eV/Å.  Gibbs Free Energy of Hydrogen Adsorption The adsorption Gibbs free-energy of hydrogen, ΔGH, is a good descriptor for hydrogen evolution [41, 42], which is defined as  H H ZPS H G E E T S     .
ΔEH is the hydrogen adsorption energy,  which can be obtained as following:  2 * ( 1) * 1 2 H nH n H H E E E E      , where * donates the catalyst  activity site.
EnH*, E(n-1)H* and  2 H E  are total energies of catalyst with n adsorbed hydrogen atoms,  total energies of catalyst with n-1 adsorbed hydrogen atoms and gas H2, respectively.
ΔEZPE and  ΔSH stand for the change in the ZPE and the change in the entropy of hydrogen between the  adsorbed state and the gas state.
We found that ΔEZPE does not vary significantly with respect to  hydrogen coverage because of the smaller entropy of hydrogen in the adsorbed state.
TΔSH ≈ TSH0  = −0.202 eV at T = 298 K, where SH0 is the entropy in the gas phase [43].
The standard hydrogen  electrode (USHE) was theoretically defined in solution [pH = 0, p(H2) = 1 bar].
The optimal HER  activity can be achieved as ΔGH goes to zero, where both hydrogen adsorption and the subsequent  desorption can be facilitated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  M.W.Z. thanks the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.  21433006 and 11774201).
Y. P. Feng acknowledges funding support from the A*STAR’s Pharos  Programme on Topological Insulators (Grant No. 1527400026).
The computational resources were  provided by the Centre for Advanced 2D Materials of the National University of Singapore in  Singapore and the National Super Computing Centre in Jinan.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS   The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES   [1] Esposito, D.V., Hunt, S.T., Stottlemyer, A.L., Dobson, K.D., McCandless, B.E., Birkmire,  R.W., and Chen, J.G. (2010).
Low‐Cost Hydrogen‐Evolution Catalysts Based on Monolayer  Platinum on Tungsten Monocarbide Substrates. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 49, 9859-9862.[2] Jang, S.-E., and Kim, H. (2010).
Effect of water electrolysis catalysts on carbon corrosion in  polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 132, 14700-14701.
[3] Wang, Y.-J., Zhao, N., Fang, B., Li, H., Bi, X.T., and Wang, H. (2015).
Carbon-supported Pt- based alloy electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in polymer electrolyte membrane  fuel cells: particle size, shape, and composition manipulation and their impact to activity.
Chem.  Rev., 115, 3433-3467.
[4] Wu, X., and Scott, K. (2011).
RuO2 supported on Sb-doped SnO2 nanoparticles for polymer  electrolyte membrane water electrolysers. Int.
J. Hydrogen Energy, 36, 5806-5810.
[5] Li, Y., Takata, T., Cha, D., Takanabe, K., Minegishi, T., Kubota, J., and Domen, K. (2013).
Vertically Aligned Ta3N5 Nanorod Arrays for Solar‐Driven Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting. Adv.
Mater., 25, 125-131.
[6] Ager, J.W., Shaner, M.R., Walczak, K.A., Sharp, I.D., and Ardo, S. (2015).
Experimental  demonstrations of spontaneous, solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting. Energy Environ. Sci., 8, 2811-2824.
[7] Youngblood, W.J., Lee, S.-H.A., Kobayashi, Y., Hernandez-Pagan, E.A., Hoertz, P.G., Moore,  T.A., Moore, A.L., Gust, D., and Mallouk, T.E. (2009).
Photoassisted overall water splitting in a  visible light-absorbing dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, 926-927.
[8] Yang, C.-J. (2009).
An impending platinum crisis and its implications for the future of the  automobile.
Energy Policy, 37, 1805-1808.
[9] Subbaraman, R., Tripkovic, D., Strmcnik, D., Chang, K.C., Uchimura, M., Paulikas, A.P.,  Stamenkovic, V., and Markovic, N.M. (2011).
Enhancing hydrogen evolution activity in water  splitting by tailoring Li(+)-Ni(OH)(2)-Pt interfaces.
Science, 334, 1256-1260.
[10] Wang, P., Jiang, K., Wang, G., Yao, J., and Huang, X. (2016).
Phase and Interface  Engineering of Platinum-Nickel Nanowires for Efficient Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution. Angew.
Chem., 55, 12859-12863.
[11] Wang, P., Zhang, X., Zhang, J., Wan, S., Guo, S., Lu, G., Yao, J., and Huang, X. (2017).
Precise tuning in platinum-nickel/nickel sulfide interface nanowires for synergistic hydrogen  evolution catalysis. Nat. Commun., 8, 14580.
[12] Seh, Z.W., Kibsgaard, J., Dickens, C.F., Chorkendorff, I., Norskov, J.K., and Jaramillo, T.F.  (2017).
Combining theory and experiment in electrocatalysis: Insights into materials design.
Science, 355, eaad4998.[13] Feng, J.X., Wu, J.Q., Tong, Y.X., and Li, G.R. (2018).
Efficient Hydrogen Evolution on Cu  Nanodots-Decorated Ni3S2 Nanotubes by Optimizing Atomic Hydrogen Adsorption and  Desorption. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 140, 610-617.
[14] Feng, J.X., Tong, S.Y., Tong, Y.X., and Li, G.R. (2018).
Pt-like Hydrogen Evolution  Electrocatalysis on PANI/CoP Hybrid Nanowires by Weakening the Shackles of Hydrogen Ions  on the Surfaces of Catalysts. J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 140, 5118-5126.
[15] Zhang, X., Luo, Z., Yu, P., Cai, Y., Du, Y., Wu, D., Gao, S., Tan, C., Li, Z., Ren, M., et al.  (2018).
Lithiation-induced amorphization of Pd3P2S8 for highly efficient hydrogen evolution. Nat. Catal., 1, 460-468.
[16] Nong, S., Dong, W., Yin, J., Dong, B., Lu, Y., Yuan, X., Wang, X., Bu, K., Chen, M., Jiang,  S., Liu, L., Sui, M., Huang, F., (2018) Well-Dispersed Ruthenium in Mesoporous Crystal TiO2 as  an Advanced Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 140, 5719- 5727.
[17] Oganov, A.R., Chen, J., Gatti, C., Ma, Y., Ma, Y., Glass, C.W., Liu, Z., Yu, T., Kurakevych,  O.O., and Solozhenko, V.L. (2009).
Ionic high-pressure form of elemental boron. Nature, 457, 863.
[18] Huang, W., Sergeeva, A.P., Zhai, H.-J., Averkiev, B.B., Wang, L.-S., and Boldyrev, A.I.  (2010).
A concentric planar doubly π-aromatic B19-cluster. Nat. Chem., 2, 202.
[19] Bezugly, V., Kunstmann, J., Grundkötter-Stock, B., Frauenheim, T., Niehaus, T., and  Cuniberti, G. (2011).
Highly conductive boron nanotubes: transport properties, work functions,  and structural stabilities.
ACS Nano, 5, 4997-5005.
[20] Zhang, Z., Penev, E.S., and Yakobson, B.I. (2016).
Two-dimensional materials: polyphony  in B flat. Nat. Chem., 8, 525.
[21] Decker, B., and Kasper, J. (1959).
The crystal structure of a simple rhombohedral form of  boron.
Acta Crystallogr., 12, 503-506.
[22] Chen, Y., Yu, G., Chen, W., Liu, Y., Li, G.D., Zhu, P., Tao, Q., Li, Q., Liu, J., Shen, X., et al.  (2017).
Highly Active, Nonprecious Electrocatalyst Comprising Borophene Subunits for the  Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 139, 12370-12373.
[23] Park, H., Encinas, A., Scheifers, J.P., Zhang, Y., and Fokwa, B.P.T. (2017).
Boron- Dependency of Molybdenum Boride Electrocatalysts for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. Angew.
Chem., 56, 5575-5578.[24] Li, Q., Zou, X., Ai, X., Chen, H., Sun, L., and Zou, X. (2018).
Revealing Activity Trends of  Metal Diborides Toward pH‐Universal Hydrogen Evolution Electrocatalysts with Pt‐Like Activity. Adv.
Energy Mater., 1803369.
[25] Woods, H., Wawner, F., and Fox, B.G. (1966).
Tungsten diboride: preparation and structure.
Science, 151, 75-75.
[26] Zou, X., and Zhang, Y. (2015).
Noble metal-free hydrogen evolution catalysts for water  splitting. Chem. Soc.
Rev., 44, 5148-5180.
[27] Gao, M.-R., Liang, J.-X., Zheng, Y.-R., Xu, Y.-F., Jiang, J., Gao, Q., Li, J., and Yu, S.-H.  (2015).
An efficient molybdenum disulfide/cobalt diselenide hybrid catalyst for electrochemical  hydrogen generation. Nat. Commun., 6, 5982.
[28] Gao, G., O’Mullane, A.P., and Du, A. (2016).
2D MXenes: A new family of promising  catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction.
ACS Catal., 7, 494-500.
[29] Gao, G., Jiao, Y., Ma, F., Jiao, Y., Waclawik, E., and Du, A. (2015).
Metal-free graphitic  carbon nitride as mechano-catalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction.
J. Catal., 332, 149-155.
[30] Nørskov, J.K., Bligaard, T., Logadottir, A., Kitchin, J., Chen, J.G., Pandelov, S., and  Stimming, U. (2005).
Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution. J. Electrochem.
Soc.,  152, J23-J26.
[31] Voiry, D., Yamaguchi, H., Li, J., Silva, R., Alves, D.C., Fujita, T., Chen, M., Asefa, T.,  Shenoy, V.B., and Eda, G. (2013).
Enhanced catalytic activity in strained chemically exfoliated  WS2 nanosheets for hydrogen evolution. Nat. Mater., 12, 850.
[32] Li, H., Tsai, C., Koh, A.L., Cai, L., Contryman, A.W., Fragapane, A.H., Zhao, J., Han, H.S.,  Manoharan, H.C., and Abild-Pedersen, F. (2016).
Activating and optimizing MoS2 basal planes  for hydrogen evolution through the formation of strained sulphur vacancies. Nat. Mater., 15, 48.
[33] Gong, Q., Wang, Y., Hu, Q., Zhou, J., Feng, R., Duchesne, P.N., Zhang, P., Chen, F., Han,  N., and Li, Y. (2016).
Ultrasmall and phase-pure W2C nanoparticles for efficient electrocatalytic  and photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution. Nat. Commun., 7, 13216.
[34] Xu, H., Cheng, D., Cao, D., and Zeng, X.C. (2018).
A universal principle for a rational design  of single-atom electrocatalysts. Nat. Catal., 1, 339-348.
[35] Yang, X.-F., Wang, A., Qiao, B., Li, J., Liu, J., and Zhang, T. (2013).
Single-atom catalysts:  a new frontier in heterogeneous catalysis. Accounts Chem.
Res., 46, 1740-1748.[36] Qiao, B., Wang, A., Yang, X., Allard, L.F., Jiang, Z., Cui, Y., Liu, J., Li, J., and Zhang, T.  (2011).
Single-atom catalysis of CO oxidation using Pt1/FeOx. Nat. Chem., 3, 634.
[37] Kresse, G., and Hafner, J. (1994).
Norm-conserving and ultrasoft pseudopotentials for first- row and transition elements. J. Phys.: Condens. Mat., 6, 8245.
[38] Perdew, J.P., Burke, K., and Ernzerhof, M. (1996).
Generalized gradient approximation made  simple. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 77, 3865.
[39] Kresse, G., and Joubert, D. (1999).
From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector  augmented-wave method.
Phys. Rev. B, 59, 1758.
[40] Grimme, S., Ehrlich, S., and Goerigk, L. (2011).
Effect of the damping function in dispersion  corrected density functional theory. J. Comput.
Chem., 32, 1456-1465.
[41] Conway, B., and Bockris, J.O.M. (1957).
Electrolytic hydrogen evolution kinetics and its  relation to the electronic and adsorptive properties of the metal. J. Chem. Phys., 26, 532-541.
[42] Parsons, R. (1958).
The rate of electrolytic hydrogen evolution and the heat of adsorption of  hydrogen. Trans. Faraday. Soc. ,54, 1053-1063.
[43] Atkins, P., and De Paula, J. (2013).
Elements of physical chemistry (Oxford University Press,  USA), 10th ed, pp: 1-1008.Supporting Information for    Tungsten Boride: a 2D Multiple Dirac Semimetal for   Hydrogen Evolution Reaction  Aizhu Wang1,2, Lei Shen3, Mingwen Zhao4*, Junru Wang 4, Weifeng Li4, Weijia Zhou1,  Yuanping Feng5*, and Hong Liu1,6*  1Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, 250022,  China  2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Department of Physics, National  University of Singapore, Singapore, 117579, Singapore  3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Science Programme, Faculty of  Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117575, Singapore  4School of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan  250100, Shandong, China  5Department of Physics & Centre for Advanced Two-dimensional Materials, National University  of Singapore, Singapore, 117542, Singapore  6State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, Shandong,  China      *Correspondences:  zmw@sdu.edu.cn (M. Z.) phyfyp@nus.edu.sg (Y. F.)  hongliu@sdu.edu.cn (H. L.)Part I The band structures of tungsten diboride  Figure S1(a) gives the top view and side view, respectively, of the tungsten diboride  configuration, where the triangle lattice W atoms are located above the center of the honeycomb  graphene-like boron lattice from the top view, form a “sandwich”.
The bond lengths are 1.746 Å,  2.513 Å and 3.025 Å for B-B, W-B and W-W, respectively.
Values of a = 3.025 and c = 3.329 is  calculated for a hexagonal unit cell, fitting well with the experiment data (a = 3.020 and c = 3.050).
Clearly, the bulk materials are metallic with several bands across the Fermi level, as shown in the  electronic band structure (Figure S1(b)).
This is in good agreement with good electron conductivity  of the tungsten diboride found in experiments [1].
Figure S1 (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication of WB2 (P6/mmm, number 191) crystal.
The  unit cell is indicated by the red line.
(b) The calculated band structures based on PBE calculations  were also listed here.
The energy at the Fermi level was set to zero.
Figure S2 (a) Schematic representation of the exfoliation process of WB2 monolayer and WB4  monolayer.
(b) Energy increase E as a function of interlayer distance (D).
Then, the possibility of producing WB4 monolayer using a mechanical exfoliation strategy was  confirmed (Figure 2S).
The cleavage energy Ecl is defined as the minimum energy required to  exfoliate a monolayer from bulk.
We used a seven-slab model to mimic a bulk material and  calculated the energy increase as a WB4 monolayer is exfoliated from the slab.
A vacuum layer at  least 15 Å was incorporated into the seven-layer slab to avoid the artificial interaction between  two neighboring slabs.
Figure S2 gives the variation of energy (and its derivative) as a function of  the interlayer distance (D) between the top most monolayer and the remnant layers, which was  fixed during the exfoliation process.
The calculated cleavage energy Ecl of WB4 is about 4.06 J m- 2.
The cleavage strength (χ) was further obtained from the derivative of energy with respect to the  distance, which is about 2.66 GPa.
It is noteworthy that the calculated cleavage energy of WB4 is  smaller than that of WB2 suggesting high plausibility to extract the WB4 monolayer from the bulk  in experiments.
Part II The thermodynamic stability and electronical properties of WB4                Figure S3 (Color online) Phonon spectrum of WB4 along the high symmetric points in BZ. Figure S4.
(Color online) Orbital-resolved band structures around Fermi level based on PBE  calculations.
The size of colorful dots is proportion to the contribution of the different orbitals on  the wave function.
The energy at the Fermi level was set to zero. Figure S5.
Charge density distributions near the Fermi level , both Dirac cone (cone ii and cone  iii) are from d orbitals of W and p orbitals of B atoms.
Cone iii, made up of bands III and IV, is  isotropic with a high symmetry, while, cone ii, made up of bands I and II, is anisotropic with a  lower symmetry.
The energy at the Fermi level was set to zero.
Figure S6 Fermi velocity evolutions of Dirac bands in the 2D WB4 lattice with external stretching  strain along the xy-direction.
The charge carriers in these linear bands will behave as massless Dirac fermions.
The Fermi  velocity (νf) of the WB4 lattice can be tested by fitting those Dirac bands at  q k K    to the  expression of  (q) | q | f E  .
The Fermi velocities are 0.72×106 m/s (band I), 0.54×106 m/s  (band II) and 0.61×106 m/s (bands III and IV), respectively.
These values are approximately  83.72%, 62.72% and 70.85% of that of graphene (0.86×106 m/s) from the present calculations.
Apart from the equalitarian state, we also investigated the robustness of semimetal states and Fermi  velocities of the WB4 monolayer under finite biaxial strain (-3% ~ 6%).
Interestingly, the electronic  structure of the WB4 lattice responds differently to compressive (negative sign) and tensile  (positive sign) strains as shown in Figure 3.
The semimetal feature is robust against the stretching  along the xy-direction, but gradually converts into metal characteristic with abundant states around  Ef under the compressional condition.
As for those semimetal states, thanks for the configure  symmetry and the out-of-plain coupling of orbitals (pz and dxz/dyz), the Dirac cone iii remains intact,  but with a linear decreasing vf from 0.61×106 m/s to 0.55×106 m/s. Affected by Г point, the νf of  band I almost keeps a constant, however, the value of band II has a sharp drop as shown in Figure  S6.Part III The hydrogen evolution reaction calculations  Here, we adopt a (2×2) WB4 2D supercell to study it’s HER performance.
On the basal plane  of WB4, there are three potential hydrogen adsorption sites, i.e., W top site, B top site and the  bridge site of B-B bond.
The hydrogen adsorption energies on these sites are calculated and  summarized in Table 1.
The bridge site of B-B bond is the most stable adsorption site with ΔEH =  -0.34 eV. The adsorption of hydrogen is much weak for the B top site ( -0.17 eV) and is unfavorable  for the W top sites (positive values).
Therefore, we will only focus on bridge site hereafter. Table S1.
Hydrogen adsorption energies on potential adsorption sites of WB4 and the height of  the hydrogen atom above the surface.
Adsorption site  Adsorption energy (eV) Δz (Å)    W top sites  1  5.56  0.27  2  1.51  0.67  3  1.51  0.65  B top site  -0.11  1.28  Bridge site of B-B bond  -0.31  1.01Figure S7 (Color online) The projected density of states (PDOS) for the s- and p-orbitals of B and  W atom under the condition with (after) and without (before) hydrogen adsorption.
The energy at  the Fermi level was set to zero.
Figure S8 (Color online) The projected density of states (PDOS) for the d-orbitals of W atom  under the condition with (after) and without (before) hydrogen adsorption.
The energy at the Fermi  level was set to zero.
Figure S9 (Color online) The evolutions of bonds.
It can be clearly seen that the perpendicular  distance between B and W decreases with the increase of lattice constant.
And the hybridization  between p-orbitals of B atoms and d-orbitals of W will change accordingly.
Figure S10 (Color online) The evolutions of charge transfer from W atom to the surrounding B  atoms in WB4 nanosheet without hydrogen adsorption.
Figure S11 (Color online) The evolutions  of the projected density of states (PDOS)  for B and W atoms.
The energy at the  Fermi level was set to zero.
Figure S12 (Color online) The evolutions of the band center.
The energy at the Fermi level was  set to zero.
In the process of stretching, the d band center plays a leading role for the evolutions of  catalyst activity.
The surface Pourbaix diagrams of the equalitarian (0%) and strained (3%) states are  constructed by plotting the thermodynamically most stable surface state under the relevant USHE  and pH values.
In our model, we assumed that the oxidation of water to OH* and O* on WB4  lattice occurred through the following steps as suggested in ref [2]:  2 H O + *   OH* + H OH* O* + H e e                          (1) Under standard conditions, the free energy of H+ + e- is equal to 1/2 H2.
Therefor, the above  equations can be rewritten as the following:   0 2 2 1 0 2 2 1 H O + *   OH* +  H 2 1 OH* O* +  H 2 G G     (2) The Gibbs free energyies of  0 1 G   and  0 2 G   are obtained by   0 + ZPE G E E T S                      (3)  where ΔE is the energy difference from with and without adsorbtion.
The values from EZPE-TΔS  are calcualted on the basis of value from Table 1 of ref [3].
Equation (1) is deoendent on the pH and potential U through the chemical potential of H+ +  e-, while, equation (2) is not.
To include the effects of pH and potential U, equation (3) can be  rewritten as equation (4):  0 1 1 0 2 2 ln10 ln10 SHE b SHE b G G eU k T pH G G eU k T pH           (4)  The free enrgy change of OH* and O* termination can be express by  * * 1 OH 1 2 O G G G G G     Figure S13 Schematic illustration of stable adsorption states with different hydrogen covering.
The unit cell is indicated by the yellow shaded area.
References  [1] Woods,H., Wawner, F., Fox, B.G., (1966) Tungsten diboride: preparation and structure,  Science, 151, 75-75.
[2] Hansen, H.A., Rossmeisl, J., Nørskov, J.K., (2008) Surface Pourbaix diagrams and oxygen  reduction activity of Pt, Ag and Ni (111) surfaces studied by DFT, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys., 10,  3722-3730.[3] Xu, H., Cheng, D., Cao, D., and Zeng, X.C. (2018).
A universal principle for a rational design  of single-atom electrocatalysts. Nat. Catal., 1, 339-348.