PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
Uniﬁed model of droplet epitaxy for compound semiconductor nanostructures:
Experiments and theory
Kristofer Reyes and Peter Smereka
Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
Denis Nothern and Joanna Mirecki Millunchick
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
Sergio Bietti, Claudio Somaschini, and Stefano Sanguinetti
L-NESS, Dipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali, Universita di Milano Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Cesare Frigeri
IMEM-CNR, Parma, Italy
(Received 16 October 2012; published 4 April 2013)
We present a uniﬁed model of compound semiconductor growth based on kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
in tandem with experimental results that can describe and predict the mechanisms for the formation of various
types of nanostructures observed during droplet epitaxy. The crucial features of the model include the explicit
and independent representation of atoms with different species and the ability to treat solid and liquid phases
independently. Using this model, we examine nanostructural evolution in droplet epitaxy. The model faithfully
captures several of the experimentally observed structures, including compact islands and nanorings. Moreover,
simulations show the presence of Ga/GaAs core-shell structures that we validate experimentally. A fully analytical
model of droplet epitaxy that explains the relationship between growth conditions and the resulting nanostructures
is presented, yielding key insight into the mechanisms of droplet epitaxy.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.87.165406
PACS number(s): 81.10.Aj, 07.05.Tp, 81.15.Hi, 81.07.Ta
I. INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology involves the manipulation of matter at
the nanoscale in order to take advantage of the physical
properties of materials which arise by a ﬁne tuning of shape and
size. Due to quantum conﬁnement effects, three-dimensional
semiconductor nanostructures can behave as artiﬁcial atoms
and, like natural atoms, show a discrete spectrum of energy
levels.1 In contrast to actual atoms, the electronic properties
of quantum nanostructures can be ﬁnely tuned by adjusting
structural parameters such as size, composition, and morphol-
ogy. The latter parameter is the most relevant for the control of
quantum nanostructure electronic properties, as tiny variations
in morphology or composition can cause dramatic changes on
the band structure.2
One of the most common methods for the fabrica-
tion of quantum nanostructures is the growth of lattice-
mismatched III-V semiconductor materials via the Stranski-
Krastanov (SK) mode. SK growth exploits the self-assembly of
pyramidal-like quantum dots (QDs), driven by the relaxation of
lattice-mismatched strain accumulated in the epilayer. Despite
the high success of the technique, which led to fundamental
physical understanding and a variety of applications, the
available design degrees of freedom remain limited. The
precise engineering of size and shape of QDs via SK self-
assembly remains problematic, thus limiting the possibilities
for the design of arbitrary electronic and optical properties.
To overcome the SK growth limitations, a fully kinetic
limited growth procedure called droplet epitaxy (DE) was
introduced.3,4 Unlike SK self-assembly, DE does not rely on
strain for the formation of three-dimensional nanostructures.
Instead, DE is based on the sequential deposition of III and
V column elements at controlled temperatures and ﬂuxes
and, as such, is a bottom-up fabrication and patterning
technique. An initial deposition of metallic group III such
as Ga in a group-V free environment leads to the formation
of nanometer-size liquid droplets. Subsequent exposure of the
liquid droplets to the group-V vapor causes them to crystallize
into quantum dots, by which we mean compact, three-
dimensional nanostructures.5,6 A variety of nanostructures
may be obtained using this technique, ranging from compact
quantum dots, quantum rings, and core-shell structures.6–11
While experimental observations evoke likely mechanisms,
a uniﬁed model for the formation of various nanostructural
morphologies via DE is still needed. Understanding the precise
mechanisms behind their formation is critical to controlling the
various properties such as shape, size, and composition, which
in turn affect the macroscopic behavior of devices based on
such quantum nanostructures.
Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulation is a useful tool
for developing and testing models of epitaxial growth and
have shed light on the important processes for a wide range
of scenarios. Previous KMC simulations of GaAs systems
modeled homoepitaxial growth on a cubic lattice. Among
the earliest simulations, a single component was used to
model epitaxial growth, varying energy parameters to account
for the expected effect on diffusivity by different Ga/As
deposition ratios.12 Two-component simulations have also
been performed13–15 to study aspects of ﬁlm growth such as the
transition from two-dimensional island formation to step-ﬂow
growth. Such simulations, however, are necessarily over small
areas and are valid only for limited range growth parameters.
165406-1
1098-0121/2013/87(16)/165406(14)
©2013 American Physical SocietyKRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
In most cases, these simulations are unable to model growth
regimes in which the group-V to group-III ratio in the growing
ﬁlm is not unity, as in the case in droplet epitaxy.
The simulations presented in this paper are designed to
capture a wide range of phenomenology in epitaxial growth,
with an emphasis on the growth from the liquid phase. We
chose to examine droplet epitaxy ﬁrst, but the simulation
and analytical methodologies presented here are applicable to
other growth mechanisms, speciﬁcally nanowire grown by the
vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) method. In both VLS and DE growth,
a liquid metal reacts with vapor, resulting in crystallization at
the liquid-solid interface. In DE, the metal is consumed during
this crystallization process. In VLS, the metal is either not
consumed or consumed more slowly than in DE, resulting in
structures of length scale larger than the original liquid droplet.
In this paper, we present experimental and simulation
results that shed light on the exact mechanisms behind the
formation of nanostructures in droplet epitaxy. We introduce
a KMC model (Sec. II) that is capable of simulating the
formation of nanostructures at all stages, from homoepitaxial
growth to liquid metal droplet formation and subsequent
crystallization. The model represents Ga and As atoms
explicitly, and treats liquid and solid phases independently.
Although atomistic, the simulations form large-scale global
structure consistent with experimental results in a reasonable
amount of time. As an initial validation of the model,
GaAs homoepitaxy simulations are compared with analogous
experiments, accurately reproducing a surface termination
phase diagram (Sec. III). We then turn our attention to the main
thrust of the paper, the nanostructural dependence on growth
conditions during droplet epitaxy. We present experimental
results exhibiting this dependence, along with corresponding
simulations (Sec. IV). The model can capture the broad
range of nanostructures observed in the experiments with
the correct qualitative dependence on growth parameters.
Moreover, simulations predict the presence of Ga/GaAs core-
shell structures, which are difﬁcult to observe unambiguously
in experiments. The existence of both monocrystalline and
polycrystalline shells suggest two independent mechanisms
of their formation: a morphological instability of the crystal-
lization front or nucleation at the vapor-liquid interface. We
show by simulation that nucleation-induced shell structures
may be recrystallized into fully crystallized GaAs islands by
annealing at high temperature (Sec. IV B1). In the case of
the instability-driven shell formation, we provide simulation
and experimental evidence to suggest the presence of a
Mullins-Sekerka instability (Sec. IV B2). Lastly, we develop
a fully analytical model (Sec. V) that describes the existence
of the structures observed and their dependence on growth
conditions. The theoretical model agrees well with simulation
and experimental results.
II. KINETIC MONTE CARLO MODEL
Prior work in simulating GaAs systems focused on ho-
moepitaxial growth and studied associated phenomena such
as step density12 and growth modes of GaAs ﬁlms.13 In
these simulations, surface diffusion of adatoms played the
central role, and because of the stoichiometric nature of
epitaxial growth, a simple cubic lattice and the solid-on-solid
FIG. 1. (Color online) KMC events. Simulations are run on a
1 + 1 analog of GaAs zinc-blende structure. Ga atoms are colored
red, As atoms are green. The model allows for atom desorption (A),
surface diffusion (B), atom-atom exchanges (C), and atom deposition
(D). The simulations are explicitly multispecies and atomistic, and
evolve via events on individual Ga or As atoms.
constraint sufﬁced in modeling key aspects of this process.
Droplet epitaxy, however, poses several issues that can not
be captured by earlier models. During DE, the system is
inherently nonstoichiometric in that the relative concentrations
of Ga and As atoms on the surface are different from one
another and so care must be taken to model liquid droplet
formation. Processes other than surface diffusion, such as
events within liquid and at the liquid-solid interface, play a
key role and can not be captured by a simple solid-on-solid
model. Lastly, DE results in large-scale nanostructures on the
order of tens to hundreds of nanometers so that the simulations
must be performed efﬁciently within large domains.
We simulate the homoepitaxial growth and droplet epitaxy
experiments with a KMC model that attempts to address the
relevant processes in DE. In the model, atoms occupy positions
on a (1 + 1)-dimensional analog of the zinc-blende lattice
illustrated in Fig. 1. Each position on the lattice is adjacent
to four nearest neighbors and four next-nearest neighbors.
Lattice sites are vacant or occupied by either a Ga or As
atom. The (1 + 1)-dimensional approach naturally hinders
our model to catch effects that are associated to the three-
dimensional crystal structure and to atomic rearrangements
driven by nonlocal energetics such as surface reconstruction
phase changes. Speciﬁcally, surface reconstruction dynamics
leads to changes in adatom surface mobility, both in terms
of diffusion length and diffusivity anisotropy, and in adatom
incorporation into the crystal structure. These effects are at
the origin, in DE, of the observed dependence on substrate
temperatureandpreparationprocedureinthedroplet formation
critical coverage during the initial Ga deposition and of the
shape and anisotropy of control of the quantum nanostructures
that are possible thanks to ﬁne control of surface reconstruction
dynamics.16,17 The simplicity of the model implies such
effects can not be captured, in line with previous work on
KMC modeling. We note here that other theoretical models
can capture surface reconstructions.18 The processes that are
captured and studied in this paper, however, yield ﬁrst-order
insight to the growth mechanisms in DE.
In each Monte Carlo step, one of four local events alters
at most two positions on the lattice. Atoms may desorb
from the surface (A in Fig. 1), diffuse on the surface (B),
exchange with neighboring atoms (C), or adsorb onto a vacant
position on the surface (D). The model does not enforce
165406-2UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
TABLE I. Pairwise nearest- and next-nearest-neighbor bonding
energies used throughout the paper.
γ (eV)
Ga
As
γnn (eV)
Ga
As
Ga
0.3
0.5
Ga
0.3
As
0.5
0.1
As
0.1
a solid-on-solid constraint. Instead, atom conﬁgurations are
required to be connected, i.e., there must exist a chain of atoms
(through nearest-neighbor bonds) between any two atoms in
the conﬁguration. While connectedness is inherently a global
property, the requirement is approximated by enforcing the
property on all local neighborhoods. Any event resulting in a
disconnected conﬁguration is disallowed.
Event rates are determined by simple nearest- and next-
nearest-neighbor bond counting. Due to the multispecies
nature of the model, several bonding energies must be
speciﬁed. Speciﬁcally, nearest and next-nearest neighbors are
bonded by energies that depend solely on the species of
the two connected atoms. Nearest-neighbor bonding energies
are given by three parameters γ (Ga,Ga), γ (Ga,As), and
γ (As,As). Next-nearest-neighbor bonds are only assigned
between atoms of the same species and are denoted γnn(Ga,Ga)
and γnn(As,As). In this way, Ga and As only interact through
nearest-neighbor bonds, whereas Ga-Ga and As-As interact
through nearest- and next-nearest-neighbor bonds. The param-
eter values used in the simulations are summarized in Table I.
These energy values imply that the Ga-As bonds are energeti-
cally preferred, while weak As-As bonds effectively eliminate
excess As by desorption. The bonding energies were calibrated
from the homoepitaxy (Sec. III) and liquid droplet simulations
(Sec. IV) to match qualitative experimental assumptions and
observations. Within the homoepitaxy simulations, the Ga-As
bond strengths were tuned in order to observe a transition
from rough island formation in the low-temperature regime to
a smooth step-ﬂow growth mechanism in high temperatures.19
In the case of liquid droplet simulations, we tune the Ga-Ga
bond strength to match liquid droplet statistics such as droplet
width and number density.
Monte Carlo transition rates r(X,Y) from atom conﬁgura-
tion X to conﬁguration Y are taken to be of an Arrhenius form
r(X,Y) = R0e−Ea(X,Y)/kBT ,
where R0 = 1013 s−1 is a constant rate prefactor, T
is
temperature, and Ea(X,Y) is the activation energy for a
particular event.
For surface diffusion, Ea is simply the sum of the bonding
energies about the diffusing atom. For the desorption of an
As atom, the activation energy is the sum of the bonding
energies about the desorbing atom and an additional desorption
barrier μAs = 1.1 eV, its value calibrated by homoepitaxial
simulations described in Sec. III. The desorption of Ga is
disallowed. In the case of atom-atom exchanges, which occur
within a liquid droplet, we use a base energy barrier ϵD for
the As diffusion barrier in liquid Ga, described in more detail
below. To facilitate exchanges occurring at the liquid-solid
interface, for which we must take solid bonds into account,
we deﬁne an intermediate state in which the exchanging
atoms are replaced by an intermediate species H. Bonding
FIG. 2. (Color online) Attachment and detachment events at
the liquid-solid interface. This ﬁgure illustrates the attachment and
detachment of an As atom in liquid Ga onto and from a perfectly
ﬂat liquid-solid interface, along with the intermediate state for the
transitions. The intermediate species H is colored blue. The black
lines indicate the relevant bonds that contribute to the change in
energy between the initial and intermediate states.
energies between Ga or As atoms and H atoms are obtained
by averaging over H = Ga and H = As, e.g.
γ (Ga,H) = 1
2 [γ (Ga,Ga) + γ (Ga,As)] .
The activation energy Ea of an atom-atom exchange at the
liquid-solid interface is then taken to be the sum of the base
barrier ϵD and the change in bonding energies between the
original and the intermediate states.
For example, we consider the attachment and detachment
of an As atom onto the liquid-solid interface, as illustrated in
Fig. 2. We denote the states before and after the detachment
as X,Y, respectively, and the intermediate state as deﬁned
above by I(X,Y). The change in energy E(X) −E[I(X,Y)]
between states X and I(X,Y), describing the additional barrier
for attachment can be computed from a small number of
relevant bonds, indicated by black lines in the ﬁgure. The
total activation energy for attachment EA = ϵD + E(X) −
E[I(X,Y)] is then given by
EA = ϵD + 4γ (Ga,As) + 4γ (Ga,Ga) + 2γnn(Ga,Ga)
−8γ (Ga,H) −5γnn(Ga,H) −γnn(As,H)
= ϵD −1
2γnn(Ga,Ga) −1
2γnn(As,As)
= 0.5 eV.
We may calculate the activation energy for detachment ED =
ϵD + E(Y) −E[I(X,Y)] in a similar manner:
ED = ϵD + 4γ (Ga,As) + 4γ (Ga,Ga)
+ 3γnn(Ga,Ga) + γnn(As,As)
−8γ (Ga,H) −5γnn(Ga,H) −γnn(As,H)
= ϵD + 1
2γnn(Ga,Ga) + 1
2γnn(As,As)
= 0.9 eV.
The forms of the attachment and detachment barriers EA and
ED indicate what physically occurs during the transitions,
namely, the formation/removal of one next-nearest-neighbor
Ga-Ga bond and one next-nearest-neighbor As-As bond.
A. Liquid barriers
Because we wish to simulate liquid droplet epitaxy, our
model identiﬁes liquid neighborhoods in which events are
165406-3KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
assigned different energy barriers to account for the salient
physics within a liquid droplet. The diffusion of As through
a liquid droplet occurs atomistically as an exchange event
between the diffusing As atom and a Ga atom neighbor. Such
an atom-atom exchange event is deemed a liquid event if there
is at most one As atom total within the neighborhood of the
exchanging atoms.
Further, such exchanges in the liquid are categorized as
occurring on either the surface or bulk of a droplet. A surface
liquid exchange event is one in where there is at least one
vacancy within the neighborhoods of the exchanging atoms.
These events represent the incorporation of an As atom from
the surface into the bulk of the droplet or vice versa and are
given a constant activation energy barrier ϵI = 1.05 eV. The
particular value of ϵI is slightly larger than the 1-eV barrier for
the diffusion of an As adatom on the surface of a liquid droplet.
A liquid event that does not occur on the surface is categorized
as a liquid bulk event and is assigned the energy barrier ϵD,
which represents the diffusion barrier of an As atom within
the bulk of the liquid. The value ϵD = 0.7 eV was calibrated
by the droplet epitaxy simulations described in Sec. IV. Only
after this model was completed did we become aware of the
experimental work of Gorokhov et al.20 who reported the
energy barrier for diffusion As in Ga of approximately 0.7 eV.
Because of its ability to handle the liquid phase inde-
pendently, along with its multicomponent nature, the model
may be minimally adapted to simulate other growth modes
in which liquid droplets are used. In particular, the model
has been applied to simulate nanowire growth by the VLS
method.21 Here, identifying liquid neighborhoods is important
to prescribe special energy barriers for the conversion of vapor
phase to a solid one, mimicking the catalytic effect of the
liquid droplet. Additionally, without the solid-on-solid (SOS)
constraint, the model captures phenomena such as nanowire
bending.
B. Detailed balance
In order to discuss detailed balance, we consider the behav-
ior of our model in the absence of deposition and desorption.22
Under such conditions, we assume the incorporation of an
As atom from the surface of a droplet into the liquid bulk
to be a rare event. The rates of the remaining events (i.e.,
surface diffusion and atom-atom exchanges both within the
liquid and at the liquid-solid interface) satisfy detailed balance
with respect to the Boltzmann distribution
π(X) = 1
Z exp

−E(X)
kBT

,
where E(X) is the energy of the state obtained by bond
counting, using bonding energies in Table I. For these events
X →Y, the activation energies are of the form
Ea = E(X) −E[I(X,Y)] + ϵ(X,Y),
(1)
where I(X,Y) is a transition state between X and Y and ϵ(X,Y)
is an additional barrier. Detailed balance follows since we have
required that I(X,Y) and ϵ(X,Y) be symmetric with respect
to their arguments.
For surface diffusion, I(X,Y) is the state with the diffusing
atom removed and ϵ(X,Y) = 0. Because the reverse event
Y →X is also a surface diffusion event, it follows that
I(X,Y) = I(Y,X) and ϵ(X,Y) = 0 = ϵ(Y,X). For atom-atom
exchanges, I(X,Y) is the state where the exchanging atoms are
replaced with intermediate species H, and hence I(X,Y) =
I(Y,X), and ϵ(X,Y) = ϵD. Note that it was claimed above
that for an As atom diffusing through liquid Ga, an activation
barrier ϵD was used without any further contribution to the
barrier from bond counting. This is consistent with the gener-
alized description of the activation energy in Eq. (1), because
in this case E(X) = E[I(X,Y)] = E(Y), i.e., no bonds are
formed/removed during the diffusion of As in liquid Ga.
C. Implementation
Because of the time and length scales associated to the
nanostructures we wish to simulate, an efﬁcient implemen-
tation of the KMC algorithm is important. A rejection-free
sampling of rates is achieved by the standard binary-tree data
structure containing partial sums of the rates,23 achieving
O(log N) sampling by binary search and O(log N) tree
updates, where N is the number of atoms. As the algorithm
proceeds, event rates for several atoms must be recomputed at
every step. A rate caching technique is employed to remove
repeated rate calculations by taking advantage of the recurrent
nature of local neighborhoods within KMC.21 This procedure
leads to signiﬁcant performance gains.
III. HOMOEPITAXY
As an initial application and validation of the simulations,
we model GaAs substrate growth at various growth conditions.
It is known that the surface reconstruction of a GaAs substrate
depends on both the temperature and the relative deposition
rates of Ga and As.24 In 1 + 1 dimensions, simulations can
not reproduce surface reconstructions. Instead, we measured
surface termination and its dependence on temperature and
incoming deposition rates. The simulation results were then
compared to experimental data.
Experiments on GaAs(001) were carried out using molec-
ular beam epitaxy (MBE) equipped with a solid source for Ga
and a valved source for As4. Substrates were initially heated
under As4 overpressure to desorb the native oxide layer. A
75-nm GaAs buffer layer was then grown at a substrate tem-
perature of 590 ◦C with a Ga deposition rate of 0.4 monolayers
per second (ML/s) and an As4 growth rate of at least 2 ML/s,
as measured by reﬂection high-energy electron diffraction
(RHEED) oscillations.25 After growing the GaAs buffer, the
substrate temperature was ﬁxed between 460 ◦C and 610 ◦C.
GaAs was then grown with a Ga rate of 0.6 ML/s, while the
As rate was slowly reduced from 3.9 to 1.0 ML/s. During the
growth, the RHEED pattern was monitored for the change from
an As-terminated reconstruction to a Ga-terminated recon-
struction. Consistent with the expected result, at high substrate
temperatures the As rate required to maintain an As-terminated
surface increases with temperature. At lower temperatures, the
necessary As rate becomes invariant with temperature.
To simulate GaAs substrate growth, both Ga and As
were deposited simultaneously on initially ﬂat, As-terminated
substrate. The Ga deposition rate FGa was ﬁxed at 0.37 ML/s,
while the As deposition rate FAs was varied so that the
165406-4UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
1/727
1/654
1/575
1/509
1/452
10
0
10
1
1/T (°C−1)
FAs/FGa
 
 
As−Terminated (Simulated)
Ga−Terminated (Simulated)
Eq. (2)
Experimental
FIG. 3. (Color online) Substrate termination phase diagram as
a function of deposition ratio and temperature, obtained from
simulations and experiments. Those growth conditions resulting
in a mostly Ga-terminated substrate are indicated by red squares,
while green circles label As-terminated ones. The blue points above
indicate the conditions where the transition from Ga to As termination
occurred experimentally. The blue curve indicates the boundary
between Ga and As-terminated given by Eq. (2).
deposition ratio FAs/FGa ranged between 0.5 and 10. Rates
(reported in ML/s) here and throughout this paper describe
the rate at which atoms are added to the system. The observed
stoichiometric growth of the ﬁlm is an emergent property of
the model rather than explicitly enforced through deposition
rates. This is manifest in the stoichiometry observed over a
broad range of deposition ratios.
The temperature was varied between 427 ◦C and 727 ◦C.
Five monolayers of total material was deposited, and surface
Ga concentration was measured at regular intervals during
the deposition of the last two monolayers. Figure 3 is a surface
termination phase diagram as a function of deposition rate
and temperature for both experimental and simulation results.
Red squares indicate the conditions where simulations show a
predominantly Ga-terminated surface, while green circles are
conditions yielding a predominantly As-terminated surface.
Experimentally determined transition from the As-terminated
2 × 4 to the Ga-terminated 4 × 2 reconstructions as deter-
mined by RHEED are shown as blue diamonds and indicate a
good agreement between simulation and experimental data.
The relevant parameter that controls surface termination
is the As desorption barrier μAs. Varying this parameter
effectively shifts the above phase diagram horizontally. The
value μAs = 1.1 eV is ﬁtted to experiments. This value,
combined with the energy values in Table I, yields a total
activation energy of
2γ (Ga,As) + γnn(As,As) + μAs = 2.2 eV
for the desorption of an As adatom from a Ga-terminated
substrate, comparing favorably to experimental results.26,27
Moreover, the speciﬁc parameter value does not signiﬁcantly
impact the qualitative shape of the phase diagram. That
is, independent of μAs, the simulations capture a constant
critical deposition ratio in the low-temperature regime and
its transition to an increasing critical ratio as temperature
increases.
Due to the simplicity of the model, individual As atoms are
deposited on the surface rather than As4 molecules. In this ho-
moepitaxy study, the adsorption/desorption processes, and in
particular the value of μAs, was tuned to match the macroscopic
properties’ surface termination and concentration. As such, the
ﬁtted value of μAs serves as an accurate measure of As growth
and incorporation onto the substrate. Other surface As kinetic
effects, including those determined by surface reconstruction
dynamics on the local scale, may not be captured by the
model. However, in the DE growth procedure, these effects
appear to be relevant mostly in determining the extended
nanostructure shape control peculiar to DE (Ref. 16) or in the
extremely low-temperature and high-As ﬂuxes. We therefore
believe that such effects should lead to minor modiﬁcations
in the description of the DE processes that are studied in this
paper.
An analytical expression for the boundary between Ga-
and As-terminated substrates can be determined. During
homoepitaxial growth, several processes occur, including
surface diffusion and As desorption, but to ﬁrst order we may
approximate the system in a quasistatic deposition/desorption-
limited regime. In this regime, the transition between the As
and Ga-terminated surface occurs when the amount of Ga on
the impinging upon the surface (given by FGa) is equal to the
net rate of As growth (given by FAs −Rdesorb), where Rdesorb
is the desorption rate of As, taken as the harmonic average
of the desorption rates for an As adatom on a Ga-terminated
surface (with desorption energy barrier 2.2 eV) and a As atom
on a Ga-terminated surface with one nearest or next-nearest
neighbor (with desorption barrier 2.3 eV). This boundary is
given by the equation
FAs
FGa
= 1 + Rdesorb
FGa
,
(2)
and agrees well with both simulation and experiments.
IV. LIQUID DROPLET EPITAXY
The main thrust of this work was to accurately capture
the processes relevant to liquid droplet formation and crys-
tallization. The experiment and simulations proceed in two
main steps, which are at the basis of the droplet fabrication of
GaAs/AlGaAs quantum nanostructures.6 First, Ga is deposited
onto the substrate by MBE, forming liquid Ga droplets. Next,
the droplets are crystallized by the introduction of an As ﬂux.
Depending on growth conditions such as temperature and As
overpressure, the actual morphology upon crystallization can
vary.6 The observed nanostructures may range from fully
crystallized compact quantum dots to nanorings and even
etched holes.7,8,16,28,29
A. Quantum dots and nanorings
1. Experimental methodology
In order to experimentally assess the exact dependence of
droplet epitaxy nanostructures on the growth condition, we
prepared a matrix of samples, sampling the typical droplet
epitaxy ranges for substrate temperatures and As4 beam
165406-5KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
FIG. 4. (Color online) Droplet epitaxy experimental results showing typical nanostructures observed over a range of substrate temperatures
and As4 BEP.
equivalent pressure (BEP). The samples were prepared follow-
ing the standard procedure for droplet epitaxy.6,30,31 After the
oxide removal and the GaAs buffer layer growth (1 μm thick at
580 ◦C), to ensure the atomic smoothness of the surface, a 200-
nm thick Al0.3Ga0.7As barrier layer is grown at the same tem-
perature of 580 ◦C. The presence of an AlGaAs barrier permits
the use of the fabricated structures, once capped with another
AlGaAs layer, as morphology controlled quantum nanostruc-
tures. We do not expect the Al content of the barrier to inﬂuence
the obtained GaAs nanostructure morphology as the AlGaAs
barrier is buried under a 1.75-ML GaAs top layer which forms
on the surface during the following Ga deposition step.6,32
Prior to the deposition of Ga, the As cell is closed and the
background pressure reduced below 10−9 Torr. Ga droplets are
then formed on the substrate surface by supplying 2.5 ML of
Ga at 350 ◦C with a deposition rate of 0.08 ML/s. Many nearly
hemispherical Ga droplets form at a density of 8 × 108 cm−2.
The average droplet diameter and height are 50 and 20 nm,
respectively. The same Ga droplet preparation procedure is
used for each sample in order to assure the same droplet
density before the crystallization procedure. We then explored
the nanostructure fabrication parameter space by varying the
substrate temperature and the As4 BEP used for the crystal-
lization of Ga droplets. Nine different samples are prepared by
systematically varying the temperature between 150 ◦C and
350 ◦C and the As4 BEP between 5 × 10−7 and 5 × 10−5 Torr.
The crystallization time is kept constant (10 min) to ensure
the complete reaction of the Ga contained in the droplets with
As atoms. The morphological dependence of the fabricated
nanostructures, measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM)
on temperature and As overpressure, is summarized in Fig. 4.
From these data, it is clear that compact islands form at low
temperature, and as the As overpressure is reduced or the
temperature is increased, the nanostructures become rings. At
the highest temperature and lowest As overpressure, only holes
remain in the place of the droplet. From large area scans (not
shown here), the number of GaAs nanostructures per unit area
is in excellent agreement with the original droplets’ density.
Each droplet was thus transformed into a GaAs nanostructure
at the end of the crystallization procedure.
2. Simulations
The simulations were performed in a similar manner to the
experiments outlined above. However, in order to simplify the
analysis, the temperature was maintained constant throughout
each simulation. This is justiﬁed by the observation that the
Ga deposition temperature affects droplet density but does
not play a relevant role in determining droplet crystallization
dynamics. Simulations proceed as follows:
(1) Ga atoms are deposited on a ﬂat, As-terminated GaAs
substrate at a rate of 0.1 ML/s at temperature T until 4.0
monolayers are deposited.
(2) The system is then annealed for 60 s in the absence of
deposition.
(3) After annealing, an As ﬂux is introduced by the
deposition of As at a rate of FAs ML/s until the system attains
equilibrium.
165406-6UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 5. (Color online) Liquid droplets grown at T = 200 ◦C,
300 ◦C, 350 ◦C and FGa = 0.1 ML/s. Here and throughout the paper,
Ga and As atoms initially belonging to the substrate are colored red
and green, respectively. Ga and As atoms deposited throughout the
simulation are colored purple and blue, respectively.
The growth parameters T and FAs were varied in order to
study their effect on the resulting morphology. The temperature
T ranged between 150 ◦C and 350 ◦C, while the As deposition
rate FAs ranged between 0.1 and 4 ML/s. Within this range
of growth parameters, we are able to simulate the formation
of a variety of nanostructures similar to those observed
experimentally.
During the ﬁrst phase of the simulation, Ga atoms are
deposited on a ﬂat, initially As-terminated GaAs substrate. The
ﬁrst monolayer of Ga deposited is consumed in creating a layer
of Ga, resulting in a Ga-terminated substrate. Afterwards, the
remaining Ga atoms diffuse along the surface and eventually
nucleate hemispherical droplets as the system attempts to
minimize the vapor-liquid interface. During droplet formation,
simulations show that liquid Ga etches into GaAs, and the
amount of etching is regulated by temperature, as illustrated in
Fig. 5. Higher temperatures result in more signiﬁcant etching.
This is in agreement with experimental observations.28,33 As
the droplet etches into the substrate liquid, Ga atoms displace
substrate As atoms, which subsequently attach near the triple
junction. In addition, some of the displaced substrate material
is wicked out of the droplet in a step-ﬂow growth mode. The
relevant model parameter controlling the effect of etching
is the additional barrier for atom-atom exchanges ϵD. The
value ϵD = 0.7 eV was selected to ﬁt qualitative experimental
observations on the amount of etching occurring at various
temperatures.
Once the liquid droplet has formed and come to equilibrium,
an As ﬂux is introduced to initiate crystallization. Arsenic
atoms deposited near or on the droplet diffuse through the
liquid quickly20 and attach most typically near the triple
junction. Such crystallization results in a growing GaAs front
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
FIG. 6. (Color online) Left panel: model snapshots of liquid
droplet crystallization at various times for T = 275 ◦C and FAs =
0.06 ML/s resulting in a compact quantum dot. Ga and As atoms
from the original substrate are colored red and green, respectively.
Ga atoms deposited to form liquid droplets are colored purple, while
As atoms deposited during crystallization are blue. Right panel: AFM
images of the GaAs growth fronts in partially crystallized droplets
after 10 s (top), 40 s (middle), and 90 s (bottom). Crystallization was
obtained at T = 150 ◦C and 5 × 10−7 Torr As pressure.
and the droplet is crystallized inward. If no nucleation occurs at
the vapor-liquid interface and the GaAs fronts coalesce, a fully
crystallized quantum dot forms in place of the liquid droplet.
Such is the case for moderate temperatures and deposition rate.
Figure 6 is a sequence of simulation snapshots illustrating
the crystallization of a liquid droplet resulting in a quantum dot
(left panel), along with analogous AFM images of the GaAs
fronts obtained experimentally (right panel). The simulation
images in the ﬁgure illustrate a typical quantum dot grown
at T = 275 ◦C and FAs = 0.06 ML/s. The general trend is
that a Ga drop forms once enough Ga has been deposited on
the surface [Fig. 6(a)], followed by crystallization near the
vapor/liquid/solid triple junction upon exposure to As ﬂux
[Figs. 6(b) and 6(c)]. As crystallization progresses, the liquid
Ga is consumed, resulting in a fully crystallized quantum
dot [Fig. 6(d)]. Experimental images (Fig. 6, right panel)
were obtained from individual samples prepared according
to the experimental procedure outlined above, varying As
exposure time. The unreacted liquid Ga was removed from
the samples before imaging by selective wet etching,8 thus
showing GaAs fronts at various stages during crystallization.
The AFM images conﬁrm the growth mechanism observed in
the simulations during crystallization.
Aside from compact quantum dots, other nanostructures
are predicted by the simulation by considering a broad
range of temperatures and As ﬂuxes. For example, if FAs
is sufﬁciently low or T is sufﬁciently large, the simulations
show the formation of nanorings upon crystallization. The
exact morphology of the nanorings is sensitive to the growth
conditions. Figure 7 shows the morphological dependence of
the rings on FAs, ﬁxing T = 375 ◦C. At low As deposition
165406-7KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
(c)
(b)
(a)
FIG. 7. (Color online) Nanorings formed at T = 375 ◦C and
FAs = 0.10, 0.20, and 0.40 ML/s.
rate (FAs = 0.1 ML/s), broad and short nanorings form.
As FAs is increased, the nanorings become more compact
and taller so that at FAs = 0.4 ML/s the resulting structure
resembles a “pitted” quantum dot. This compares well to the
experimental results in Fig. 4, e.g., the transition in structure
between Figs. 4(c) and 4(f) as As4 BEP is lowered. Figure 4(c)
resembles the pitted quantum dot structure of Fig. 7(c). If
the BEP is lowered, the resulting nanostructure in Fig. 4(f)
is a broad and shallow disk surrounding a pit, resembling
Fig. 7(a). Similar structures and their dependence on both
As deposition rate and temperature have been reported in the
literature.10,34
B. Core-shell structures
In addition to quantum dots and nanorings, simulations
show the existence of Ga/GaAs core-shell structures. These
structures consist of liquid gallium being completely sur-
rounded by GaAs. In the low-temperature/high-deposition rate
regime, the GaAs shells are polycrystalline. However, in a
higher-temperature/lower-ﬂux regime, the simulations show
the formation of a shell in registry with substrate. It will
be shown in the following that the ﬁrst case is the result of
nucleation of GaAs at the vapor-liquid interface, whereas the
second case results from a Mullins-Sekerka instability of the
crystallization growth front.
1. Nucleation
In the low-temperature and high-As-deposition rate regime,
nucleation of GaAs clusters near the vapor-liquid is signiﬁcant.
This results in the formation of a polycrystalline GaAs shell
surrounding a liquid Ga core, as illustrated in Fig. 8. In the
ﬁgure, a liquid droplet grown at T = 150 ◦C is crystallized
by an As ﬂux, deposited at a rate of 0.8 ML/s. Nucleation at
the vapor-liquid interface occurs within seconds upon crystal-
lization [Fig. 8(b)]. The liquid core in the ﬁnal conﬁguration
[Fig. 8(c)] is completely surrounded by a GaAs shell after
2.4 s, preventing any further crystallization of the liquid.
The presence of polycrystalline GaAs, with a high number
of grain boundaries and stacking faults that this implies,
prevents the possibility that such islands could act as efﬁcient
emitters and hence are undesirable. Annealing at higher tem-
perature may remove such defects because grain boundaries
and stacking faults provide fast diffusion paths for the liquid
Ga trapped within the shell. Such paths are accessible at higher
temperatures. Moreover, thermal ﬂuctuations of the nuclei can
(c)
(b)
(a)
FIG. 8. (Color online) Simulation snapshots at times t =
0, 1.8, 2.4 s after crystallization, T = 150 ◦C, and FAs = 0.8 ML/s.
effectively serve to dissolve the shell, which are characteristi-
cally thin in this regime. Therefore, such conﬁgurations may
be annealed at a high temperature to remove defects. Indeed,
the simulations bear this out. Figure 9 shows a quantum dot
with polycrystalline shell resulting from the crystallization of a
liquid droplet at an As deposition rate of FAs = 0.80 ML/s and
temperature T = 150 ◦C. The dot is then annealed at a higher
temperature T = 350 ◦C. The initial conﬁguration [Fig. 9(a)]
shows the droplet prior to recrystallization. Temperature is then
increased, maintaining the same As ﬂux. Ga atoms move along
grain boundaries toward the surface, resulting in a broadening
of the dot. The thin shell dissolves, resulting in liquid Ga
exposed to As [Figs. 9(b) and 9(c)]. Within two seconds, the
droplet becomes fully crystallized [Fig. 9(d)] into a shallow
GaAs island, absent of any defects.
These simulations show that liquid cores arising due to
nucleation at the vapor-liquid interface, which would be detri-
mental to optical and electronic properties of quantum dots, can
be eliminated by annealing. This expands the parameter space
available for the formation of quantum dots formed via droplet
epitaxy, allowing the fabrication of optical quality dots even at
low temperatures. Even if not strictly related to the presence
of a liquid core, but rather to a low quality of the crystalline
nature of the fabricated nanostructures, post-crystallization
in situ annealing temperatures have been experimentally
demonstrated to strongly increase the optical quality of droplet
epitaxy GaAs/AlGaAs dots, reducing individual dot emission
lines,35 allowing single-photon emission up to liquid nitrogen
temperatures,36 and increasing the dot emission decay time.
2. Mullins-Sekerka instability
As described above, simulations show that crystallization
performed at low temperature and high As ﬂux result in
nucleation of polycrystalline GaAs shells surrounding a liquid
Ga core, resulting from nucleation of GaAs at the vapor-
liquid interface. In the high-temperature regime, such surface
nucleation does not occur. However, for crystallization at
165406-8UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
FIG. 9. (Color online) Simulation snapshots of a quantum dot an-
nealed at high temperature at time t after temperature was increased.
(a) The dot after exposure to As deposition at FAs = 0.80 ML/s
and temperature T = 150 ◦C. This results in a polycrystalline GaAs
shell trapping a liquid Ga core. (b)–(d) Temperature is increased to
T = 350 ◦C and the atoms rearrange in order to fully crystallize the
liquid core.
sufﬁciently high ﬂuxes and high temperature, simulations
show the existence of liquid Ga core structures surrounded by
GaAs shells in registry with the substrate. As a consequence,
such shells are monocrystalline and result from a mechanism
separate from surface nucleation.
By examining the formation of such structures in the
simulations, we propose that these shells are driven by
an instability at the liquid-solid growth front. Simulation
snapshots in Fig. 10 illustrate the growth mechanism behind
this. When this phenomenon occurs, no surface nucleation is
observed; instead, the growth of the GaAs front undergoes
an instability at the liquid-solid interface characterized by
unstable undulations of the solid growth front. Such insta-
bilities grow along the droplet-vapor surface until they have
completely surrounded the liquid Ga, subsequently preventing
further crystallization.
This behavior suggests the presence of a Mullins-Sekerka
(MS) instability during crystallization, which implies that only
perturbations of sufﬁciently large wavelength experience un-
stable growth. Therefore, droplets must be sufﬁciently large to
accommodate perturbations of appropriate wavelength in order
for the instability to manifest. The effect that temperature,
As ﬂux, and droplet radius have on the presence of the MS
instability is given in Sec. V, but the droplet size dependence
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 10. (Color online) Snapshots of liquid core formation at
times t = 1.4, 1.8, and 2.0 s after crystallization at temperature T =
350 ◦C and deposition rate FAs = 1.0 ML/s.
may be utilized in order to conﬁrm the existence of liquid cores
by MS instability experimentally.
It is important to note that simulations suggest that, unlike
those formed by surface nucleation, the core-shell structure
formed due to the MS instability can not readily be annealed
and recrystallized into an epitaxial nanodot. In this case, the
shell is in registry with respect to the substrate. Therefore, there
are no defects along which liquid Ga can move so that they
may crystallize upon exposure to the As vapor. Crystallization
of such liquid cores may still occur, however, if the shell is
thin enough to dissolve upon annealing, thus exposing the
liquid Ga to the As ﬂux; however, instability-induced shells
are characteristically thicker than those resulting from surface
nucleation according to simulations.
Experimental
validation.
In
order
to
experimentally
validate the presence of the MS instability predicted by
simulations, nanoislands were formed via droplet epitaxy by
depositing Ga droplets of extremely different sizes (60 and
250 nm diameter) and crystallizing them at high As BEP at
150 ◦C. Simulations predict a size-driven transition from a
uniform crystallization for small droplet radii to a Ga-rich core
at higher droplet sizes. We used Si as the growth substrate.
This is dictated by the need of differentiation of the nanoisland
constituents (Ga and As) from that of the substrate (Si),16
thus allowing the use of standard EDS STEM techniques for
the characterization of the As and Ga distribution within the
islands. The samples were prepared as follows. Before the
introduction into the MBE system, Si(001) substrates were
cleaned by standard RCA treatment and ﬁnally dipped into
HF solution to get the H-termination of the surface, conﬁrmed
by the (1 × 1) pattern observed with RHEED. Subsequently,
the substrate temperature was set at 780 ◦C and the hydrogen
desorption was carried out until a mixed (2 × 1) (1 × 2)
surface reconstruction was clearly obtained. After this step,
the substrate temperature was decreased to either 200 ◦C
(sample A) or 600 ◦C (sample B) for Ga deposition. Here, a
Ga molecular beam ﬂux was supplied with a deposition rate of
165406-9KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
0.075 ML/s and a background pressure below 5 × 10−10 Torr
for a total of 3.0 ML of Ga. Finally, the crystallization of Ga
was achieved at 150 ◦C by exposure to an As ﬂux of 5 × 10−5
Torr for 5 min. During the As irradiation, the RHEED pattern
turned from halo, indicative of liquid droplets, to spotty,
signaling the formation of three-dimensional structures.
However, a clear spotty pattern was not observed for the larger
islands.
For TEM observations, an FEG (ﬁeld emission gun)
TEM/STEM 2200 FS JEOL instrument operated at 200 kV
was used. It was equipped with an energy dispersive x-ray
spectrometer (EDS) and an in-column omega-type energy
ﬁlter. By the latter, elemental maps of Ga and As can be
obtained in the energy ﬁltering operation mode of the TEM
(EF-TEM). The EF-TEM elemental maps were acquired with
a GATAN slow scan CCD camera controlled by the Digital
Micrograph software. The maps were obtained by recording
the intensity of the L3 absorption edge for Ga (at 1116 eV) and
As (at 1323 eV). One post-edge and two pre-edge images were
acquired using a slit of 50 eV for both Ga and As. From the
two pre-edge images, the background image was evaluated,
which was then subtracted from the post-edge image to get
the relevant elemental map. EDS maps were obtained in the
STEM operation mode with a spot size of 1 nm and recording
the intensity of the L characteristic x-ray emission lines of Ga
(1096 keV) and As (1282 keV). The JEOL ultrathin window
Si detector and software were employed for acquisition of
the maps. Dead time during measurements was 5%–6% and
counting time of the order of 8–10 min.
The TEM top views of islands from sample A, obtained
with diffraction vector g = [2-20], clearly show Moir´e fringes,
due to the interference between the crystal lattice of the island
(GaAs) and that the Si substrate (Fig. 11). EDS map scans show
the same distribution of the Ga and As signals, which mimics
the island shape, thus demonstrating the correct stoichiometry
of the GaAs all over the island volume, i.e., a fully crystallized
island. A different scenario is shown by sample B. Here,
the nanostructure-generated Moir´e interference fringes are
visible only at the island edges with a featureless center.
EDS map scans show that the distribution of Ga and As
is extremely different inside the island (Fig. 12). While the
Ga signal intensity follows the island proﬁle, As intensity is
peaked at the island perimeter with a small, though nonzero,
As signal coming from the center. Such a distribution is
conﬁrmed by EF-TEM (energy-ﬁltered TEM) measurements,
and implies a metallic Ga core similar to the one depicted
in Fig. 10.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 11. (Color online) Sample A. (a) Planar view TEM micro-
graph of two (70 nm diameter) GaAs microislands. (b), (c) EDS maps
of Ga and As, respectively, of the islands in (a).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(f)
(e)
FIG. 12. (Color online) Sample B. (a) SEM image of a GaAs
microisland (250 nm diameter). (b) Planar view TEM micrograph of
a GaAs microisland. (c), (d) EDS maps of Ga and As, respectively, of
the island in (b). (e), (f) EF-TEM image for Ga and As, respectively,
of another GaAs microisland (TEM image not shown).
The experiment rules out the presence of a liquid Ga
core/GaAs shell structure by means of surface nucleation due
to the fact that the shell is monocrystalline and appears only for
the high droplet radius. Nucleation at the liquid-solid interface
is predicted to be driven more by the growth temperature and
As ﬂux. Because both samples were performed at the same
growth conditions, if nucleation-driven GaAs shells were to
occur, they must occur in both samples. Because this is not the
case, we may conclude that the liquid cores observed in the
experiments are driven by an MS instability.
V. MODEL ANALYSIS
Both simulations and experiments have shown that droplet
epitaxy can result in a wide range of morphologies depending
on the growth conditions. By varying FAs and T , we have
established their effect on the resulting nanostructures ob-
served in simulations. From these data, it is clear that compact
islands form at low temperature and, as the As overpressure is
reduced or the temperature is increased, the nanostructures
become rings. In cases of large FAs, core-shell structures
are observed. The simulation results are summarized in the
structural map given in Fig. 13. In this section, we will appeal
to physical and mathematical arguments to further explain the
simulation results. In particular, the solid lines in Fig. 13 that
delineate the morphological structure will be derived in this
section.
We argue that various morphologies observed both in
experiments and simulations can be explained in the context
of three key processes active during nanostructure formation.
In the ﬁrst, Ga atoms in the liquid drop will be “wicked”
out of the droplet onto the substrate by capillary-type forces
when exposed to an As overpressure. These forces arise as it is
energetically favorable for As atoms on the surface to become
fully coordinated with Ga atoms. Next, As atoms deposited
near or on the droplet diffuse rapidly20 through the liquid and
attach on a growing GaAs front at the liquid-solid interface,
crystallizing the droplet epitaxially. Finally, As atoms may also
nucleate near the vapor-liquid interface. These three processes
(wicking, crystallization, and nucleation) are illustrated in
165406-10UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
1/350
1/300
1/250
1/200
1/150
10
−1
10
0
1/T (°C−1)
FAs (ML/sec)
 
 
Nucleation
Liquid Cores
Nanorings
Compact Structure
FIG. 13. (Color online) Morphological dependence on growth
conditions. This nanostructural phase map summarizes simulation
results of droplet epitaxy and crystallization at various As deposition
rates and temperatures. The three boundary curves indicate theoreti-
cally derived critical conditions delineating the simulation results and
obtained in this section. The leftmost, black line is given by Eq. (9).
The middle, red curve corresponds to Eq. (13). The rightmost, blue
curve is given by Eq. (12).
Fig. 14. The relative rates at which these processes occur
depend on growth conditions and will determine the resulting
morphology.
A. Nanoring formation
The formation of nanorings is a competition between
the wicking and crystallization processes. The crystallization
process results in GaAs fronts that grow until the liquid Ga
is consumed. If the fronts coalesce before this occurs, the
resulting nanostructure is a compact quantum dot. If, however,
the liquid Ga is consumed before the fronts come together,
nanorings result.
To compare the rates of the two processes, we establish
expressions for the velocity of the GaAs front as well as the
rate at which Ga atoms are wicked out of the droplet. Assuming
quasistatic deposition, the velocity vn of the GaAs front under
an As deposition rate FAs scales according to that rate:
vn = gℓFAs,
(3)
where ℓis the atomic spacing of the lattice and g is the
factor that depends on the shape of the liquid region and
possible difference in the As adsorption probability between
FIG. 14. (Color online) Schematic of kinetic processes that
determine nanostructural development.
the droplet itself and its surroundings. For simplicity, g = 1.
In the wicking process, Ga atoms are driven from the droplet
by the deposition of As on the surface away from the droplet.
The time scale of the wicking process is given by
τ =
1
FAs
,
(4)
while the diffusion length scale is given by
λ =

D′
Ga
FAs
,
(5)
where D′
Ga is the diffusion coefﬁcient of Ga diffusing on
a mostly Ga-terminated surface, in the presence of As
deposition. We have
D′
Ga = ℓ2R0 exp

−E′
Ga
kBT

,
where R0 = 1013 s−1 was deﬁned in Sec. II to be a rate
prefactor.
The energy barrier E′
Ga = 1.26 eV describing the diffusion
of Ga on surface not purely Ga terminated is obtained from the
harmonic average of the diffusion rates of Ga-on-Ga diffusion
and Ga-on-As diffusion. By prescribing a constant value E′
Ga
that describes the effective energetic barrier for diffusion
on a mostly Ga-terminated surface, we have assumed that
the diffusivity throughout the domain is constant. In reality,
diffusivity is spatially dependent due to differences in surface
reconstruction near and away from the liquid Ga as observed
in micro-RHEED experiments by Isu et al.37 This effect is also
at the origin of the possibility, offered by droplet epitaxy, to
tune ring morphologies.16 In extreme growth regimes when
temperature is less than 150 ◦C and As overpressure greater
than 5 × 10−5 Torr, the surface reconstruction may change
rapidly even in the proximity of the droplet, implying that the
spatial dependence on diffusivity is an important effect. Away
from such growth conditions, however, assuming constant
effective diffusivity is a reasonable approximation.
Equations (4) and (5) yield a velocity vw for the wicking of
Ga atom from the liquid droplet:
vw = λ
τ = ℓ

R0FAs exp

−E′
Ga
2kBT

.
(6)
A fully crystallized quantum dot forms under conditions where
the crystallization process is dominant (vn ≫vw). However,
if the wicking process is sufﬁciently fast (vn ∼vw), then as
described above, the fronts may fail to coalesce, resulting in
a nanoring. The critical conﬁguration separating these two
scenarios occurs when the crystallization fronts are tangent
to each other. To express this critical condition quantitatively,
consider the volume of unconsumed liquid Ga at time t:
V (t) = V0 −2ℓvwt −2ρ1(vnt)2,
(7)
where ρ1 = π
4 is a shape constant describing the geometry of
the crystallization front (which we model as a quarter-circle)
and
V0 = ρ2r2
is the initial volume of the liquid droplet of radius r, ρ2 = 3π
4
being the shape constant that describes the geometry of the
165406-11KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
droplet. As a ﬁrst-order approximation, the value of ρ2 is
selected as the average of the shape constant describing a
circular and half-circular droplet. The radius of a Ga droplet
obtained from the deposition of 4.0 ML of Ga atoms at
temperature T and ﬂux FGa was found empirically from
independent simulations to follow the power law:
r = ℓ1−2αr0
DGa
FGa
α
,
(8)
where r0 = 11.34 (# atoms) and α = 0.182 are empirically
obtained values. DGa is the diffusion coefﬁcient for Ga-on-Ga
diffusion with corresponding energy barrier EGa = 0.9 eV. The
positive root tf of Eq. (7) describes the time when all Ga has
been consumed. The length of the crystallized front is then
given by vntf , and the critical condition may be expressed as
vntf = r.
Using Eqs. (8), (3), and (6), this critical conﬁguration can be
written in terms of the growth conditions as
F r
As =

2F α
Ga
(ρ2 −2ρ1)gr0
2
R1−2α
0
exp
2αEGa −E′
Ga
kBT

.
(9)
If FAs > F r
As, then compact structures will result on the other
hand if FAs < F r
As nanorings will result. Figure 7 illustrates
the transition from nanorings to compact quantum dots with
increasing FAs. The black line in Fig. 13 shows a plot of F r
As
versus 1/T . The agreement with the simulation data is quite
good: it separates compact structures (black dots in the ﬁgure)
from nanorings (black circles).
A crucial assumption has been made in the argument
presented here, namely, that no nucleation takes place within
the Ga droplet and the crystallizing front moves in a stable
fashion (i.e., no Mullins-Sekerka instability occurs). In what
follows, we shall examine in what regimes in parameter space
these factors play an important role.
B. Nucleation
Here, we will demonstrate that when the As deposition
rate is sufﬁciently large and temperature is low enough,
the dominant process will be nucleation at the vapor-liquid
interface. As a consequence, the wicking process makes
a negligible contribution to the morphology. The rate of
the nucleation process at the vapor-liquid interface may be
estimated by considering the As concentration cAs(x,y,t)
within a domain of liquid Ga in contact with a GaAs substrate
and As ﬂux. For simplicity, we will consider the domain
to be rectangular with periodic boundary conditions in the
horizontal direction. Assuming quasistatic deposition at a rate
FAs ML/s and temperature T , the concentration satisﬁes
∇2cAs = 0,
ℓDAs
∂cAs
∂y

y=L
= FAs,
cAs|y=0 = c0,
where c0 is the equilibrium As concentration above a ﬂat
liquid-solid interface and the diffusion coefﬁcient
DAs = ℓ2R0 exp

−ϵD
kBT

describes the diffusion of As through liquid Ga, ϵD = 0.7 eV
being the energy barrier for diffusion throughout the liquid
droplet deﬁned earlier in Sec. II.
The equilibrium concentration c0 is of the form
c0 = ℓ−2 exp
EA −ED
kBT

,
where ED,EA are the energy barriers for the detachment
and attachment of an As atom in the liquid phase from and
onto a ﬂat interface, respectively, deﬁned in Sec. II. From
this diffusion model, the equilibrium concentration csurf at the
surface of the droplet is given by
csurf = FAsL
ℓ3R0
exp

−ϵD
kBT

+ ℓ−2 exp
EA −ED
kBT

,
(10)
where L is the height of the droplet.
Nucleation is most likely to occur where the As concentra-
tion is the largest, near the vapor-liquid interface. This means
that nucleation will occur when csurf is larger than some critical
concentration:
csurf ⩾c0 exp
Enuc
kBT

,
(11)
where Enuc = 0.01 eV is the nucleation barrier of GaAs in
liquid Ga, treated as a ﬁtting parameter. Replacing L in Eq. (10)
with the droplet radius r, the critical condition (11) for surface
nucleation can be expressed in terms of T and FAs as
F n
As = R1−α
0
F α
Ga
r0
exp
EA −ED −ϵD + αEGa
kBT

×

exp
Enuc
kBT

−1

.
(12)
If the As deposition rate exceeds F n
As, then GaAs crystallites
will form at the vapor-liquid interface, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
The blue line in Fig. 13 is a plot F n
As as a function of 1/T .
It accurately predicts the presence of nucleation in simulation
results (blue triangles).
C. Mullins-Sekerka instability
In the case where the rates of both the wicking and
nucleation processes are negligible, the crystallization process
dominates, resulting in the growth of crystallization fronts
at the triple point and in registry with the substrate. As
observed in Sec. IV B2, this growth can be unstable due to a
Mullins-Sekerka instability leading to GaAs shells epitaxial to
the substrate surrounding a liquid Ga core. Perturbations to the
planar growth front of sufﬁciently long wavelength experience
this instability, and a standard linear perturbation analysis38,39
yields a critical wavelength
c = 2πℓ3/2

R0γ
FAskBT exp
EA −ED −ϵD
2kBT

,
165406-12UNIFIED MODEL OF DROPLET EPITAXY FOR COMPOUND . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
where γ = 0.1 eV per lattice spacing is the liquid/solid
interfacial energy per length, obtained directly from the model.
In order to accommodate perturbations that experience the
MS instability, droplets necessarily must have radius on the
order of c, i.e., r ⩾CC, for some constant C. This critical
condition may be expressed in terms of FAs and T using the
above equation along with the model for droplet radius (8):
F MS
As = ℓC2
2πF α
Ga
r0
2
γ
kBT R1−2α
0
× exp
EA −ED −ϵD + 2αEGa
kBT

.
(13)
If F MS
As < FAs < F n
As, then liquid cores will form via a Mullins-
Sekerka instability. Figure 13 shows a plot of F MS
As
versus
1/T . The scaling constant C = 1
8 was selected to best match
simulation results, although its speciﬁc value does not affect
the qualitative shape of the boundary curve, and in particular
its slope. The simulation results when a liquid core was
observed are plotted as red triangles. We observe that the
theoretical curve slightly underestimates the instability within
the simulations. This underestimation is inherent to our model
and can be attributed to discrete effects. Such effects on
nucleation and hence instabilities of the type outlined above
are indeed well studied in the context of diffusion-limited
aggregation.40,41
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented experimental, simulation, and analytical
results detailing the precise relationship between growth
conditions and the resulting nanostructures formed in droplet
epitaxy and crystallization experiments. The KMC model
used in conjunction with experiments was presented as an
explicitly atomistic, multispecies, multiphase model capable
of simulating all the relevant processes involved with GaAs
homoepitaxy, droplet epitaxy, and crystallization. As an initial
validation, the KMC model accurately reproduces surface
termination diagram in the case of GaAs homoepitaxy.
We then presented simulation and experimental results of
droplet formation and crystallization, exhibiting a qualitative
agreement of the resulting morphological dependence on
As ﬂux and temperature. Both experiments and simulation
suggest a continuum of structures ranging between compact
quantum dots to broad nanorings as a function of As ﬂux
and temperature. Simulations also suggest the existence of
Ga/GaAs core-shell structures, as well as elucidating the
mechanisms behind their formation. The simulations sug-
gested that a quantum dot with a liquid core could result
due to a Mullins-Sekerka instability during the growth of the
GaAs front. We presented experiments which validate this
hypothesis. In the case of nucleation-driven shells, we provide
simulation evidence suggesting that under high-temperature
annealing, polycrystalline shells may be recrystallized into an
epitaxial GaAs island. Lastly, we developed a unifying theory
identifying three key processes active during crystallization.
It predicts the existence of all the phenomena observed above
and their dependence on growth conditions and compares well
with empirical simulation data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
P.S. and K.R. were supported in part by NSF support
Grants No. DMS-0854870 and No. DMS-1115252. D.N. and
J.M.M. acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the NSF through
Grant No. DMR-0906909. S.B., C.S., and S.S. acknowledge
the CARIPLO Foundation for ﬁnancial support (Project
SOQQUADRO, No. 2011-0362).
1M. Kastner, Phys. Today 46(1), 24 (1993).
2J. Li and Lin-Wang, Nano Lett. 3, 1357 (2003).
3N. Koguchi, S. Takahashi, and T. Chikyow, J. Cryst. Growth 111,
688 (1991).
4N. Koguchi, K. Ishige, and S. Takahashi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 11,
787 (1993).
5N. Koguchi and K. Ishige, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 2052 (1993).
6K. Watanabe, N. Koguchi, and Y. Gotoh, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 39,
L79 (2000).
7T. Mano, T. Kuroda, S. Sanguinetti, T. Ochiai, T. Tateno, J. Kim,
T. Noda, M. Kawabe, K. Sakoda, G. Kido et al., Nano Lett. 5, 425
(2005).
8C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti, Nano Lett.
9, 3419 (2009).
9C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, A. Scaccabarozzi, E. Grilli, and
S. Sanguinetti, Cryst. Growth Des. 12, 1180 (2012).
10C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, S. Sanguinetti, N. Koguchi, and
A. Fedorov, Nanotechnology 21, 125601 (2010).
11C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti,
Nanotechnology 22, 185602 (2011).
12T. Shitara, D. D. Vvedensky, M. R. Wilby, J. Zhang, J. H. Neave,
and B. A. Joyce, Phys. Rev. B 46, 6815 (1992).
13T. Kawamura and A. Ishii, Surf. Sci. 438, 155 (1999).
14T. Kawamura and A. Ishii, Surf. Sci. 493, 438 (2001).
15A. Ishii and T. Kawamura, Sur. Sci. 436, 38 (1999).
16C. Somaschini, S. Bietti, N. Koguchi, and S. Sanguinetti, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 97, 203109 (2010).
17C.
Somaschini,
S.
Bietti,
A.
Fedorov,
N.
Koguchi,
and
S. Sanguinetti, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 5, 1865 (2010).
18A. Chakrabarti, P. Kratzer, and M. Schefﬂer, Phys. Rev. B 74,
245328 (2006).
19C. Orme, M. D. Johnson, J. L. Sudijono, K. T. Leung, and B. G.
Orr, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 860 (1994).
20V. Gorokhov, T. Dedegkaev, Y. Ilyin, V. Moshnikov, A. Petrov,
Y. Sosov, and D. Yaskov, Cryst. Res. Technol. 19, 1465 (1984).
21K. Reyes (unpublished).
22M. Biehl, in Multiscale Modeling in Epitaxial Growth, Vol. 149 of
International Series of Numerical Mathematics, edited by A. Voigt
(Birkhauser, Berlin, 2005), pp. 3–18.
23J. L. Blue, I. Beichl, and F. Sullivan, Phys. Rev. E 51, R867 (1995).
165406-13KRISTOFER REYES et al.
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 87, 165406 (2013)
24A. Ohtake, Surf. Sci. Rep. 63, 295 (2008).
25I. Ferguson, A. de Oliveira, and B. Joyce, J. Cryst. Growth 121, 267
(1992).
26B. Liang and C. Tu, J. Cryst. Growth 128, 538 (1993).
27H. Yamaguchi and Y. Horikoshi, J. Appl. Phys. 71, 1753 (1992).
28Z. M. Wang, B. L. Liang, K. A. Sablon, and G. J. Salamo, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 90, 113120 (2007).
29T. Kuroda, T. Mano, T. Ochiai, S. Sanguinetti, K. Sakoda, G. Kido,
and N. Koguchi, Phys. Rev. B 72, 205301 (2005).
30K. Watanabe, S. Tsukamoto, Y. Gotoh, and N. Koguchi, J. Cryst.
Growth 227, 1073 (2001).
31T. Kuroda, S. Sanguinetti, M. Gurioli, K. Watanabe, F. Minami, and
N. Koguchi, Phys. Rev. B 66, 121302 (2002).
32S. Sanguinetti, K. Watanabe, T. Tateno, M. Wakaki, N. Koguchi,
T. Kuroda, F. Minami, and M. Gurioli, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 613
(2002).
33C. Heyn, A. Stemmann, M. Klingbeil, C. Strelow, T. K¨oppen,
S. Mendach, and W. Hansen, J. Cryst. Growth 323, 263 (2011).
34C.
Somaschini,
S.
Bietti,
A.
Fedorov,
N.
Koguchi,
and
S. Sanguinetti, J. Cryst. Growth 323, 279 (2011).
35T. Mano, M. Abbarchi, T. Kuroda, C. A. Mastrandrea, A. Vinattieri,
S. Sanguinetti, K. Sakoda, and M. Gurioli, Nanotechnology 20,
395601 (2009).
36L. Cavigli, S. Bietti, N. Accanto, S. Minari, M. Abbarchi, G. Isella,
C. Frigeri, A. Vinattieri, M. Gurioli, and S. Sanguinetti, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 100, 231112 (2012).
37T. Isu, M. Hata, and A. Watanabe, J. Cryst. Growth 111, 210
(1991).
38G.
S.
Bales
and
A.
Zangwill,
Phys.
Rev.
B
41,
5500
(1990).
39B. Caroli, C. Caroli, and B. Roulet, in Solids Far from Equilibrium,
edited by C. Godr´eche (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 1992), pp. 155–296.
40G. Russo, L. M. Sander, and P. Smereka, Phys. Rev. B 69, 121406
(2004).
41T. A. Witten and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400 (1981).
165406-14