This content has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text.
Download details:
IP Address: 130.216.129.208
This content was downloaded on 21/05/2015 at 21:06
Please note that terms and conditions apply.
The parallel dynamics of drift wave turbulence in the WEGA stellarator
View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage for more
2009 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 085005
(http://iopscience.iop.org/0741-3335/51/8/085005)
Home
Search
Collections
Journals
About
Contact us
My IOPscienceIOP PUBLISHING
PLASMA PHYSICS AND CONTROLLED FUSION
Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005 (16pp)
doi:10.1088/0741-3335/51/8/085005
The parallel dynamics of drift wave turbulence in the
WEGA stellarator
S Marsen, M Endler, M Otte and F Wagner
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Plasmaphysik, EURATOM Association, Wendelsteinstraße 1,
17491 Greifswald, Germany
E-mail: stefan.marsen@ipp.mpg.de
Received 24 February 2009, in ﬁnal form 8 June 2009
Published 10 July 2009
Online at stacks.iop.org/PPCF/51/085005
Abstract
The three-dimensional structure of turbulence in the edge (inside the last closed
ﬂux surface) of the WEGA stellarator is studied focusing on the parallel
dynamics. WEGA as a small stellarator with moderate plasma parameters
offers the opportunity to study turbulence with Langmuir probes providing
high spatial and temporal resolution. Multiple probes with radial, poloidal
and toroidal resolution are used to measure density ﬂuctuations. Correlation
analysis is used to reconstruct a 3D picture of turbulent structures. We ﬁnd
that these structures originate predominantly on the low ﬁeld side and have a
three-dimensional character with a ﬁnite averaged parallel wavenumber. The
ratio between the parallel and perpendicular wavenumber component is in the
order of 10−2. The parallel dynamics are compared at magnetic inductions of
57 and 500 mT. At 500 mT, the parallel wavelength is in the order of the ﬁeld
line connection length 2πR/ι. A frequency resolved measure of k∥/kθ shows
a constant ratio in this case. At 57 mT the observed k∥is much smaller than
at 500 mT. However, the observed small average value is due to an averaging
over positive and negative components pointing parallel and antiparallel to the
magnetic ﬁeld vector.
M This article features online multimedia enhancements
(Some ﬁgures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)
1. Introduction
The understanding of turbulence, the major cause of losses in magnetic conﬁnement devices,
is a key issue on the way to a fusion reactor. In recent years it has been shown that small
machines too, with dimensions and plasma parameters far from fusion relevant values, can
contribute signiﬁcantly to this research area [1]. One of the advantages of small devices
0741-3335/09/085005+16$30.00
© 2009 IOP Publishing Ltd
Printed in the UK
1Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
with moderate plasma parameters is the applicability of Langmuir probes for ﬂuctuation
measurements providing an excellent spatial and temporal resolution. The plasma parameters
in these experiments are moderate enough to place probes stationary in the plasma, even in the
region of closed ﬂux surfaces. This work focuses on presenting details on the three-dimensional
structure of turbulence and its dynamics parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld vector in the edge region
of a stellarator plasma. In a stellarator very detailed information on the parallel dynamics can
be obtained since the magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration is usually known very precisely and can be
mapped experimentally as will be shown later.
By edge region, we mean the region just inside the last closed ﬂux surface (LCFS) close
to the scrape-off layer (SOL). Most previous experimental works presenting information
on the parallel dynamics of turbulence focused on the SOL. However, theoretical models
comparing turbulence in regions of open and closed ﬁeld lines predict turbulence in the edge
to differ from the SOL in its driving mechanism [2]. In the edge region periodic boundary
conditions, introduced by the magnetic ﬁeld topology, lead to the physical consequence that
the wavenumber component parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld k∥cannot vanish for disturbances
of ﬁnite size. In this case, the electrostatic potential ˜φ is coupled to the electron pressure ˜pe
through parallel forces mediated by parallel currents ˜J∥, where (˜) denotes the ﬂuctuating part
of the quantity. This type of dynamics is referred to as drift wave turbulence. In contrast, in
the SOL, the ﬁeld lines end on divertor plates or limiters. The periodic boundary conditions
from the edge therefore do not apply and turbulence with k∥= 0 in the plasma is allowed.
This type of dynamics is called interchange turbulence.
Absolute values of k∥observed in the SOL of tokamaks and stellarators vary from values
vanishing within the error bars [3–5] up to ﬁnite values in the order of k∥≈(0.5 . . . 10)ι/R
[6–8], where ι is the rotational transform and R is the major radius of the device. A common
result of experiments is that ﬂuctuations appear as localized events of ﬁnite lifetime, which
are strongly elongated along the magnetic ﬁeld [9]. A strong anisotropy exists with parallel
correlation lengths being at least two orders of magnitude larger than in the poloidal direction.
A detailed study of the parallel dynamics of turbulence in the edge region has been performed
at the TJ-K torsatron [10], where turbulence is clearly dominated by drift wave dynamics, as
is also the case for the WEGA stellarator [11].
The results presented in this paper further support the picture of drift wave dynamics
dominating turbulence in the edge of toroidal devices, and we shall present details on its
parallel dynamics.
The ideal experimental setup to study the spatio-temporal structure of turbulence would
be a 3D grid of measurement points as indicated in ﬁgure 1. Due to the strong elongation of
structures along the magnetic ﬁeld vector B, the grid distance in the toroidal direction may
be much larger (O [m]) than in the radial and poloidal directions (O [cm]). Such a setup, if
sampled at an appropriate temporal resolution, would be able to reﬂect the real spatio-temporal
structure of ﬂuctuation events. However, due to limited experimental access, such an approach
to the 3D structure of turbulence has to our knowledge not been realized in a fusion device.
Typical experimental setups are limited to two sampling points in the toroidal direction [4, 5, 8].
A more sophisticated approach has been realized in the TJ-K torsatron [10] and in a similar
manner in WEGA. The approach used in this work is a 2D matrix of sampling points in the
radial–poloidal plane (r–θ plane), supported by an additional single reference point which is
separated from the grid in the toroidal direction (black dots in ﬁgure 1). Information about
the parallel dynamics of turbulence is obtained by placing the reference point on a ﬁeld line
intersecting the grid after a deﬁned connection length (Lc, approximately the toroidal probe
separation). Applying this two-point approach together with a heuristic model as the basis
for the interpretation of the results [5] one can already conclude about the 3D structure of
2Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 1. Experimental approach to study the spatio-temporal structure of turbulence. A 3D grid
of points sampling elongated ﬁlaments would be the ideal diagnostic.
turbulence. The model will be introduced in section 2. In section 3 the experimental setup
and the results from experimental ﬁeld line mapping will be presented. Results on the parallel
dynamics of turbulence in WEGA in different operational regimes will be presented in section 4
and ﬁnally discussed in section 5.
2. Heuristic model of three-dimensional drift wave turbulence
For simpliﬁcation, the approach given in ﬁgure 1 is reduced to 2D geometry in the poloidal–
toroidal plane (θ–ϕ plane) and a coherent wave is considered ﬁrst. The geometry is depicted
in ﬁgure 2(a). The position P0 marks the point where a ﬁeld line, starting at the reference
probe (Pref), intersects the grid. Data are analysed by calculating the cross-correlation function
(CCF) between time traces taken with the reference probe and the corresponding time traces
from the individual points of the grid. The position where the highest correlation is found
within the matrix is of particular interest. This may, in general, be shifted with respect to the
intersection point P0 by a certain length δθ(t). The highest cross-correlation for zero time lag
τ occurs at P1 (corresponding to δθ,0), which is aligned on the wavefront crossing Pref. In
the case of a ﬁnite k∥, P1 is displaced by a distance of δθ,0 with respect to P0. The method
to derive information about k∥from this two point measurement in the toroidal direction has
been introduced by Ritz et al [6]. The ratio k∥/kθ is given by the inclination angle ϑ and can
thus be derived from the knowledge of δθ,0 and the parallel probe separation length Lc:
k∥/kθ = δθ,0/Lc = tan ϑ.
(1)
k∥can also be determined directly from the phase shift α between Pref and P0:
k∥= αref,0/Lc.
(2)
The parallel phase velocity v∥of the wave can be derived from the time a wavefront needs
to propagate along B from Pref to P0. In the CCF between these two points this is the time
lag of maximum cross-correlation τ1:
v∥= Lc/τ1.
(3)
The relations up to now apply to a planar wave of a given frequency and wavenumber.
However, the considerations may be transferred to turbulent density ﬂuctuations which
typically appear as localized events with a ﬁnite correlation length in all three dimensions. Such
turbulent structures are in general advected by the background poloidal E × B velocity. The
3Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 2. (a) A coherent drift wave, with a wavefront slightly tilted with respect to B is sampled
by probes at two toroidal positions separated by the connection length Lc. Pref and P0 are aligned
on a connecting ﬁeld line. Pref and P1 are aligned on a wavefront. (b) In the case of turbulence no
clear wavefront exists, but structures elongated along B. In this case P1 is the point of maximum
correlation at τ = 0.
following description will consider only the self-consistent dynamics of turbulent structures.
This is valid, as long as the radial electric ﬁeld is either negligible or leads to an unsheared
E × B velocity proﬁle.
The toroidal correlation length is expected to be about two orders of magnitude longer
than in the poloidal direction (k∥/kθ ≈10−2). Hence, the structures, colloquially dubbed
as ‘blobs’, are strongly elongated in the parallel direction and represent ﬂuctuation events as
illustrated in ﬁgure 2(b). In this representation v∥is an averaged phase velocity. Equation (2)
becomes the parallel dispersion relation k∥(ν) with the cross-phase spectrum αref,0(ν) between
Pref and P0. Following Ritz et al [6] an averaged cross-phase between two signals 1 and 2 can
be deﬁned:
¯α1,2 =

|1,2(ν)|α1,2(ν) dν
 
|1,2(ν)| dν,
(4)
where |1,2(ν)| is the absolute cross-power spectrum. An average parallel wavenumber ¯k∥
corresponds to ¯α following (2).
Assuming the wavefront of all contributing Fourier components to point in the same
direction (k∥/kθ ̸= f (ν)), the complete structure is tilted by an angle ϑ with respect to the
magnetic ﬁeld. Evidence for the validity of this representation can be obtained from the cross-
phase spectra along the legs of the triangle deﬁned by Pref, P0 and P1. Pref and P1 are assumed
to be aligned on the same wavefront for all scales k(ν). Therefore, the cross-phase αref,0(ν)
should tend to zero, in contrast to a ﬁnite phase shift for P0 which is displaced normal to the
so-called wavefront. The normal distance from the wavefront is equal for the paths −−−−→
Pref, P0
and −−−→
P1, P0. Hence, similar cross-phases are expected along the legs of the triangle in ﬁgure 2.
In contrast to plane waves, where a velocity component parallel to the wavefronts cannot
be deﬁned, a ‘blob’ can have velocity components in all directions. Therefore, an observed
Lc/τ1 can be the sum of the projection of the poloidal velocity v′
∥= (Lc/δθ,0)vθ and a true
parallel component of the ‘blob’ velocity v′′
∥:
v∥= Lc/τ1 = v′
∥+ v′′
∥.
(5)
If we now proceed to multiple such blob structures with ﬁnite lifetimes, different cases
have to be distinguished considering the statistical spatial distribution of structures. A preferred
toroidal phase velocity is inherent in this representation because all k∥components of the
spectrum are assumed to point in the same direction.
An additional component of the
parallel dynamics is the growth and thereby the spatial expansion of structures with time.
The correlation maximum within the grid undergoes a temporal evolution giving information
4Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
about this statistical distribution. For ﬂuctuations arising randomly at any point in the toroidal
direction, the correlation function would, on average, see a structure which appears between
the two toroidal positions under observation. The highest correlation in the matrix would, in
this case, occur at zero time lag at P1.
A different concept is that ﬂuctuations appear preferably in a certain region along the
magnetic ﬁeld line. This assumption is not unrealistic because a strong poloidal asymmetry
of ﬂuctuation properties is a common observation in fusion devices [12–15].
Poloidal
asymmetries in the edge are always linked to asymmetries along the magnetic ﬁeld line as the
rotational transform connects different poloidal regions along a magnetic ﬁeld line. However,
a preferred occurrence of ﬂuctuations at a certain point, and an expansion from this point
would lead to a ﬁnite time lag of maximum cross-correlation between reference and grid if the
propagation times from the ‘starting point’ to reference and grid are not equal. This time lag
(called τ2 subsequently) may occur when the correlation maximum is at any position in the
matrix along the path of the structure.
A more complicated picture results if the assumption of the ratio k∥/kθ being constant
for all frequency components does not hold. An example is an equally distributed spectrum
of parallel wavenumbers without a preferred direction. This may result in vanishing values of
δθ,0 and τ1. In this case no detailed information about the parallel dynamics of turbulence can
be retrieved from the correlation function.
We now turn from general geometrical considerations to speciﬁc properties of drift waves.
Due to the ﬁnite k∥of the drift wave, δθ,0 is expected to show ﬁnite values in WEGA. A
simple estimation of the smallest values of δθ,0 to be expected shall be given here. k∥can be
estimated based on a fundamental assumption which underlies the Wakatani–Hasegawa drift
wave turbulence model [16]. k∥is assumed to be in the order of ι/R where R is the major
plasma radius. The corresponding wavelength 2πR/ι is called the ﬁeld line connection length,
which for a rational surface with a toroidal modenumber of m = 1 is the length of a ﬁeld
line before it closes upon itself. The poloidal wavenumber is estimated by kθ ≈0.15/ρs.
ρs = √mikBTe/eB is the so-called drift scale.
Simulations of drift wave turbulence in
stellarator geometry show the shoulder of the spectral power of kθ to be in the range between
0.1/ρs and 0.2/ρs [17] as is typically observed in experiments [18]. For WEGA parameters
this estimation leads to k∥≈ι/R ≈0.3 m−1 and an expected perpendicular displacement of
δθ,0 = k∥ρs/0.15 · Lc ≈0.5 cm with ρs ≈0.1 cm.
3. Experimental setup
WEGA is a classical ﬁve period l = 2 stellarator. It is a small experiment (major radius
R = 72 cm, aspect ratio ≈7) with moderate plasma parameters. Typical densities and electron
temperatures are in the range of ne ≲5×1018 m−3 and Te up to some 10 eV, respectively [19].
WEGA provides a very ﬂexible magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration with a toroidal ﬁeld of up to
B0 = 0.9 T. The rotational transform is determined by the ratio between the toroidal and
helical ﬁeld coil current (ι ∝(IH/IT)2) and can be varied in a range from zero to about 1.
All results presented in this paper have been obtained using helium as working gas in a ﬁeld
conﬁguration with ι0 = 0.224 on the magnetic axis. The plasma is heated by ECRH at
2.45 GHz (maximum 26 kW (cw)) [20] or 28 GHz (maximum 10 kW (cw)) leading to more
or less ﬁxed working points for the magnetic induction at B0 = 57 mT and B0 = 500 mT,
respectively. These two operational regimes of WEGA will be labelled low ﬁeld and high ﬁeld
operation subsequently. In the high ﬁeld operation densities for the plasma conditions under
consideration were typically by about one order of magnitude higher than at low ﬁeld, while
the temperatures were comparable.
5Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 3. Probe arrangement for toroidally resolved measurements. A poloidal array of 13 probes
samples the shaded region on the r–θ plane in a radial scan. A single stationary reference probe
can be placed on a ﬁeld line intersecting the sampling region of the array displaced by a connection
length of Lc = 170 cm.
3.1. Langmuir probe arrangement
The moderate plasma parameters allow the use of Langmuir probes along the whole plasma
cross-section. The common practice of operating the probes only at single working points for
ﬂuctuation measurements was applied here, namely all results in this paper show measurements
of the ion saturation current, which is assumed to be proportional to density ﬂuctuations
neglecting temperature ﬂuctuations ( ˜Isat,i ∝˜ne). It is well known that this approach may lead
to errors in estimating absolute values of turbulent transport which is affected by temperature
ﬂuctuations [21]. But considering the statistical properties of ﬂuctuations, like correlation
functions and Fourier spectra, results from ˜Isat,i measurements have been shown to be in good
agreement with independent methods including temperature ﬂuctuations [22].
The technical realization of the experimental approach to 3D turbulence given in section 1
is shown schematically in ﬁgure 3. Two probe systems are installed at WEGA. A single
probe placed on a 2D movable manipulator acts as the reference probe for toroidally resolved
measurements. The actual spatial information is obtained from a poloidal array of probes with
probe tips aligned to the ﬂux surfaces. The array of 13 probes with a poloidal distance of 5 mm
is mounted on a fast reciprocating manipulator performing a radial scan in about 1 s covering
the poloidal cross-section marked in ﬁgure 3. An essential point in order to get information
about the parallel dynamics of turbulence is that the reference probe can be placed in such a
manner that a ﬁeld line starting at its tip intersects the cross-section covered by the array in a
well-deﬁned connection length (here Lc = 170 cm).
Using the reference probe together with the array it is possible to reconstruct averaged
turbulent structures in the sampling region. To this end the time traces taken during a radial scan
of the array are divided into subwindows to get a radial resolution. A scan is typically divided
into 20–30 slices of 20–40 ms each (30 000–60 000 samples), resulting in a radial resolution
of δr ≈2–4 mm. Thus a grid of sampling points is produced, where individual time traces
are taken. This grid will be referred to as the matrix in the following. Turbulent structures
are now reconstructed by calculating the CCF between each subwindow of the matrix and
simultaneously sampled subwindows of data from the reference probe. To make data from
different regions along the pressure gradient comparable, all subwindows are normalized to
their ﬂuctuation amplitude prior to the correlation analysis.
A point to be brieﬂy discussed here is the unavoidable perturbation of the plasma by
the probes. Although probe arrays are widely used for spatially resolved studies of plasma
6Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
turbulence it is recently discussed, in how far turbulence is affected by the probes penetrating
the plasma. In our case, this has been checked looking at the evolution of ﬂuctuations properties
measured by the stationary reference probe while the array is entering the plasma. It could
be shown that the relative ﬂuctuation amplitude as well as the spectral properties remained
unaffected.
3.2. Field line tracing
A prerequisite for the construction of a three-dimensional picture of turbulence is a precise
knowledge of the magnetic topology. The statistical analysis of raw data is based on a two point
measurement with probes aligned on a connecting ﬁeld line. As detailed above, the expected
effect is a small shift of turbulent structures with respect to the connecting ﬁeld line. Field line
tracing calculations were used to determine constellations where connecting ﬁeld lines exist.
However, relying on these calculations might introduce an error, which is hard to determine,
since the absolute coil currents as well as the absolute position of both probe systems with
respect to the coil system need to be known precisely. The effect of small misalignments of
probes on the results of toroidally resolved measurements has been discussed by Thomsen
et al [23] for the case of a time dependent ﬁeld perturbation in a tokamak.
However,
in a stellarator the magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration can be determined
experimentally, and at low β (β was below 10−4 for the experimental conditions considered
here) the vacuum magnetic conﬁguration is not noticeably altered during plasma operation.
Using experimental ﬁeld line mapping, only the reproducibility of probe positions (about
±1 mm in our case) and the magnetic conﬁguration (ι) determined by the coil currents have
to be considered.
The magnetic conﬁguration expressed in terms of the relative error of
the rotational transform is reproducible by ι/ι < 0.25%. The error in determining the
intersection point of the connecting ﬁeld line resulting from this uncertainty is below 1 mm in
the poloidal plane.
Experimental ﬁeld line mapping is based on the electron beam technique which is also
used for ﬂux surface measurements [24, 25]. To this end the reference probe was replaced
by an electron gun injecting an electron beam into the vacuum magnetic ﬁeld parallel or
antiparallel to B. The beam energy was set to 30 eV by the accelerating voltage in the gun.
This relatively low beam energy was chosen in order to minimize the ∇B and curvature drift.
The perpendicular drift along the toroidal probe separation length of 1.7 m is below 1 mm for
electrons at 30 eV, even at an induction of only 50 mT. The gun was placed roughly at a position
where numerical calculations with the W7-code [26] predicted the existence of a connecting
ﬁeld line to the matrix. The beam with a width of ≈2 mm followed a ﬁeld line and could be
visualized in a background gas at a low neutral pressure (argon at a pressure of pN ≈10−3 Pa)
to see its intersection with the matrix.
In order to determine the exact intersection point, the beam was ﬁnally detected by the
probe array itself. To this end, the probe tips were grounded over a shunt resistor. The electron
current collected by the probes was measured in a radial scan of the array. Figure 4 shows
the amplitude of the detected current for a conﬁguration where the connecting ﬁeld line was
located close to the plasma centre. The intersection point of the electron beam can be clearly
seen as a strong local increase in the signal intensity. With the help of this ﬁeld line mapping
technique different connecting ﬁeld lines were determined. Two positions of the reference
probe lying approximately on the same ﬂux surface were selected for the plasma experiments.
The ﬁrst one intersects the matrix in the equatorial plane at z = 0, the second one near the
lower end of the matrix at z = −2.5 cm. The considered ﬂux surface is about 5 mm inside the
LCFS. A comparison between experimental mapping and calculations shows a discrepancy
7Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 4. Visualization of the electron beam detected by the probe array. The intensity represents
the amplitude of the electron current collected by the grounded probe tips. Only the part of the
matrix is shown where the beam was observed. The dark region marks the highest intensity where
the beam intersects the poloidal plane covered by the array. The picture shows an example, where
the intersection point is deep in the plasma core.
of ≳5 mm for the intersection point. The reason for this discrepancy is probably a sum of
several small systematic errors. The absolute positioning of the reference probe and the array
as well as erroneous absolute coil currents contribute to this error. Simulations have shown
that a relative error of only ≈2% in one magnetic ﬁeld component (i.e. toroidal or helical ﬁeld)
can explain the observed discrepancy. This shows the importance of the experimental ﬁeld
line mapping because the expected effect of δθ,0 ≈1 cm, is in the order of this discrepancy.
The results presented below are based on the experimental ﬁeld line mapping shown in this
section.
4. Experimental results
4.1. Summary of general characterization of turbulence in WEGA
The poloidal probe array has been used to study the general character of turbulence in WEGA
and its poloidal dynamics. Results from the ﬁrst experimental campaign have been published
previously [11] leading to the conclusion that turbulence in WEGA is dominated by drift wave
dynamics. Some of the main results characterizing turbulence in WEGA and leading to this
conclusion are summarized here.
• Turbulent broadband power spectra are observed, which are ﬂat up to some 10 kHz and
decay following a power law for higher frequencies.
• Typical correlation times representing the averaged lifetime of turbulent structures are in
the order of τL ≈100 µs.
• Strongest density and potential ﬂuctuations are observed in the region of the steepest
density gradient. That is turbulence in WEGA is driven by the pressure gradient providing
the free energy as is the case for drift wave turbulence.
• The cross-phase between density and potential perturbations is below π/4 on all scales
of signiﬁcant ﬂuctuation power.
Assuming adiabatic electrons, density and potential
ﬂuctuations associated with the drift wave are in phase. However, any dissipative effect in
the parallel electron dynamics introduces a ﬁnite phase shift. In WEGA, mainly collisional
effects cause the observed phase shift.
• The poloidal correlation length dθ, representing the averaged structure size, was found
to scale nearly linearly with the inverse magnetic induction. It was about dθ ≈2 cm for
high ﬁeld (500 mT) and dθ ≈14 cm for low ﬁeld (57 mT). These variations ﬁt well with
8Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
the theoretical prediction of drift wave turbulence models predicting ρs ∝1/B to be a
characteristic scaling length for the shoulder of kθ spectra [27].
• The poloidal velocity inside the LCFS points in the electron diamagnetic drift direction.
vθ inside the LCFS was also nearly proportional to 1/B, i.e. several 100 m s−1 at high ﬁeld
and several km s−1 at low ﬁeld. The poloidal E × B velocity was negligible here. This
is again an indicator of drift wave turbulence as the poloidal phase velocity of drift waves
is the electron diamagnetic drift velocity vdia,e ∝1/B. A change of sign of vθ in the SOL
caused by E × B drift was observed in the high ﬁeld case.
An important point for the following results on the parallel dynamics is that the poloidal
E × B drift in the edge of WEGA is negligible compared with the electron diamagnetic drift
velocity. Therefore, the self-consistent dynamics of turbulent structures can be observed in
WEGA without E × B advection.
4.2. Toroidally resolved experiments at high ﬁeld
4.2.1. Temporal evolution of turbulent structures.
The matrix decomposition of a radial scan
was used to reconstruct the radial–poloidal correlation function in the poloidal plane covered
by the array as explained in section 3. Figure 5 shows the relative correlation between the
reference probe and individual points in the matrix. Each plot is a snapshot of the correlation
function for a ﬁxed time lag. The dot at R = 78.9 cm, z = −2.5 cm marks the experimentally
determined intersection point of the ﬁeld line starting at Pref, where the diameter of the dot
corresponds roughly to the measurement error determined by the spatial resolution provided
by the probe array. Information about the dynamics of turbulence in the poloidal plane can
be gained from the series of snapshots for increasing time lags in ﬁgure 5. At τ < −80 µs a
structure enters the observation window at the upper boundary (z = +2.5 cm). With increasing
time lag the correlation amplitude at the centre of the structure continuously increases until a
certain point and ﬁnally decreases again, thus reﬂecting the lifetime of the structure. During
its lifetime the structure propagates in the poloidal direction following the ﬂux surface shape
(solid black lines in ﬁgure 5). A movie showing the complete temporal evolution of the CCF
is available online as a multimedia attachment. The structure is elongated in the poloidal
direction by a factor of about 2, hence the poloidal correlation length (2 cm) is longer than the
radial correlation length (≈1 cm).
The colour coding in ﬁgure 5 yields the time lag of maximum correlation between
τ = −20 . . . 0 µs. A different representation of the temporal evolution of structures is shown in
ﬁgure 6. It shows the highest correlation amplitude of all points of the matrix as a function of the
time lag. Additionally, the poloidal distance of this maximum from the intersection point of the
connecting ﬁeld line is plotted. The temporal evolution of the correlation maximum clearly
shows the growth of structures up to a relative correlation of about 60% and the following
decay. The inclination of δθ(τ) reﬂects the poloidal velocity of structures. vθ was constant
in the observed window. A linear ﬁt resulted in vθ ≈300 m s−1, in good agreement with the
electron diamagnetic drift velocity derived from stationary plasma parameters.
The most interesting information that can be gained from ﬁgure 6 comes from the time
lag of maximum correlation, labelled τ2, which clearly deviated from zero. The maximum
was found at τ2 = (−12 ± 2.2) µs, where the given error is a measure for the statistical
scatter of data among individual discharges.
By deﬁnition, a negative sign of τ2 means
that structures were on average ﬁrst observed at the matrix and delayed by τ2 at Pref. This
result gives evidence that ﬂuctuation events did not arise randomly at any position. They
preferably appeared closer to the toroidal position of the matrix and expanded from there. No
information about the symmetry of expansion could be gained from these experiments because
9Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 5. CCF between the data from the reference probe and individual subwindows in the matrix
for a He discharge at B ≈500 mT, ι ≲0.25, ne ≈1018 m−3 and Te ≲10 eV. The dot marks the
intersection point of the connecting ﬁeld line. The temporal evolution of the observed structures
is illustrated as a series of snapshots in the R–θ plane for different time lags τ. The structure
propagates along a ﬂux surface (black lines) in the electron diamagnetic drift direction. The ﬁgure
does not represent the dynamics of an individual ﬂuctuation event but a statistical average. A movie
showing the complete temporal evolution of the CCF is available online as a multimedia attachment
at stacks.iop.org/PPCF/51/085005.
no further measurement points in the toroidal direction but the reference probe were available.
Information about the average parallel wavenumber can be gained from both ﬁgures 5 and 6. To
this end we consider the centre of the structure at zero time lag. It was found to be displaced
from the intersection point by δθ,0 = (1.1 ± 0.3) cm.
Hence, in the blob representation
presented above the structure was tilted with respect to the connecting ﬁeld line by a small
angle ϑ (see section 2). Following (1) the ratio between the average parallel and perpendicular
wavenumber was ¯k∥/¯kθ = tan ϑ = (0.6 ± 0.17) × 10−2. A quantitative evaluation of absolute
values of k∥from cross-spectral analysis will be given in the subsequent section.
The next step was to look at the correlation between two points aligned on the same ﬁeld
line (Pref and P0). Figure 7 shows their cross-correlation function together with the average of
their auto-correlation functions. Both functions show nearly the same width and shape. The
cross-correlation maximum was relatively small (≈40%) because the structure was already
collapsing when it passed P0 at a time lag of τ1 = (24.3 ± 2.6) µs. Following (3), τ1 determines
the averaged parallel phase velocity of structures: v∥= Lc/τ1 = (7 ± 0.74) × 104 m s−1.
Hence, the parallel phase velocity of structures had a preferred direction, pointing from Pref
towards P0. As pointed out in section 2, v∥is the sum of two contributions. The contribution
of vθ was v′
∥= vθ(Lc/δθ,0) = (4.6 ± 1.3) × 104 m s−1. The intrinsic parallel blob velocity
10Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 6. Temporal evolution of the correlation maximum in ﬁgure 5. (black ——) Correlation
maximum at the centre of the structure, (red - - - -) displacement of the maximum from the
intersection point. The highest correlation is observed at τ2. At τ = 0 the centre of the structure
is displaced from the intersection point by δθ,0 ≈1 cm. (black, · · · · · ·) Envelope of the poloidal–
temporal correlation function, measured only by the array on the ﬂux surface under consideration.
Figure 7. Temporal CCF between data from Pref and P0 (solid line). The dashed line reﬂects the
averaged auto-correlation function for both points. The time lag of maximum cross-correlation,
τ1, corresponds to a ﬁnite parallel phase velocity of structures.
component v′′
∥was estimated to be the ion sound velocity. cs is, for the large scales under
consideration (kθρs ≪1), the upper limit at which a density perturbation associated with a
drift wave can propagate along a ﬁeld line. cs as derived from stationary plasma parameters was
≈1.5 × 104 m s−1. Within the error bars v∥was the sum of v′
∥and v′′
∥= cs. Due to the parallel
dynamics of structures τ1 is not necessarily the time when their centre passes P0. In ﬁgure 6
it can be seen that the structure passes the intersection point at a time lag of τ ′
1 ≈34 µs.
This results in v′
∥= Lc/τ ′
1 = 5 × 104 m s−1, in good agreement with the estimation from
vθ(Lc/δθ,0).
4.2.2. Parallel and perpendicular dispersion relation.
More quantitative results on k∥and
about the validity of the model description in section 2 could be derived from cross-spectral
analysis. Poloidally resolved measurements in WEGA have shown that the spectral power
11Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 8. Coherence (top) and cross-phase (bottom) spectra calculated along the legs of the triangle
in the ϕ–θ plane deﬁned by Pref, P0 and P1. (——, black) α(Pref →P1), so-called wavefront.
(· · · · · ·, red) α(Pref →P0), parallel wavenumber component. (- - - -, green) α(P1 →P0),
poloidal wavenumber component. (— · —, black) parallel—poloidal component. Data were taken
from a high ﬁeld (a) and a low ﬁeld (b) discharge.
of turbulence in kθ–ν space is distributed in a narrow band around the drift wave dispersion
relation. This allows the interpretation of cross-phase spectra from poloidally separated points
as the dispersion relation following kθ(ν) = α(ν)/y, where y is the spatial separation
of measurement points. This relation can be generalized for any spatial direction. In the
triangle {Pref, P0, P1} in ﬁgure 2, the cross-phase between Pref and P0 then reﬂects the parallel
dispersion relation, k∥(ν) = α∥(ν)/Lc. kθ is derived from P1 and P0. If the assumptions made
in the description of the ‘blob’ representation are valid, kθ(ν) and k∥(ν) should coincide.
Furthermore, the phase shift between Pref and P1 should vanish because both points are
assumed to be aligned on the same wavefront for all Fourier components contributing to the
turbulent spectrum. Figure 8(a) shows the cross-phase spectra, together with the corresponding
coherence spectra for all three legs of the triangle. For the given probe distance, a signiﬁcant
coherence for this type of discharge was observed for frequencies up to ν ≈8 kHz. In this
range good agreement between poloidal and parallel cross-phase is apparent. Both show a
similar shape. The vanishing cross-phase between Pref and P1 veriﬁes the assumption that
in the given frequency range of signiﬁcant coherence both probe tips were aligned along a
wavefront. Since the ratio k∥/kθ was independent of the frequency, the Fourier components of
the turbulent broadband spectrum of wavenumbers k pointed in the same direction. A small
phase shift along the line, claimed to be a wavefront, was remanent. This was on the one hand
due to the typical jitter in the turbulent spectra. On the other hand the limited spatial resolution
did not allow a perfect alignment of two probes to a wavefront. P1 was solely the point of
highest correlation in the matrix at τ = 0.
To come to a quantiﬁcation of k∥the cross-power weighted average parallel wavenumber
was calculated using (2) and (4). The parallel phase spectrum from ﬁgure 8(a) yielded an
average cross-phase of ¯α = 0.869 ± 0.067, corresponding to an average parallel wavenumber
of ¯k∥= ¯α/Lc = (0.51 ± 0.04) m−1. This result is in the order of ι/R ≈0.3 m−1, implying
that the averaged parallel wavelength was in the order of the system size deﬁned by the ﬁeld
line connection length.
12Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
Figure 9. Snapshot of the CCF between the reference probe and the matrix at τ = 0 for a discharge
at low magnetic ﬁeld (57 mT).
4.3. Toroidally resolved experiments at low ﬁeld
The parallel turbulence dynamics was also studied for the low ﬁeld case. The ratio IH/IT and
hence the rotational transform could be kept constant in order to achieve the same connecting
ﬁeld lines as in the high ﬁeld case.
4.3.1. Temporalevolutionofturbulentstructures.
Thegeneralinformationaboutthetemporal
evolution of structures that can be gained from the CCF between the reference probe and the
matrix was, at ﬁrst sight, comparable to the results from high ﬁeld discharges. Structures,
propagating in the electron diamagnetic drift direction during the process of growth and
decay were observed. Figure 9 shows a snapshot of the CCF at τ = 0. Due to the large
poloidal correlation length, which was already observed in poloidally resolved measurements,
the structure is not fully contained in the observation window. The structure was more strongly
elongated in the poloidal direction relative to the radial size than at the high ﬁeld experiments.
The evaluation of τ2 from the maximum of the CCF in the matrix showed as a universal feature
of WEGA that ﬂuctuation events preferably arise closer to the matrix. τ2 was of the same order
as in the high ﬁeld case and also negative. Identical experiments were undertaken at an inverted
magnetic ﬁeld to give evidence for the universal character of this observation. The magnetic
topology remains constant if both IT and IH are inverted. The result of these experiments
was that τ2 remained negative. Hence, structures arose on average closer to the matrix and
expanded towards the reference probe, independently of the orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld
vector.
The centre of the structure in ﬁgure 9 is shifted versus the intersection point by δθ,0 =
(2.2 ± 0.7) cm, yielding a ratio of ¯k∥/¯kθ = (1.3 ± 0.4) × 10−2.
A parallel phase velocity of v∥= (2.1 ± 0.46) × 105 m s−1 could be deduced from
these experiments for the low ﬁeld case. However, the two contributions of v∥could not be
discriminated within the error bars for the low ﬁeld case, since v∥≫cs. But v∥was still in the
order of the estimation from vθ(¯kθ/¯k∥).
4.3.2. Parallel and perpendicular dispersion relations.
The relation of cross-phase spectra
in the triangle {Pref, P0, P1} should clarify whether the same model description is valid for
13Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
both low and high ﬁelds. Figure 8(b) shows the result of the cross-spectral analysis. The
phase shift in the poloidal direction is rather small, as expected since the poloidal separation of
the probes under consideration (δθ,0 ≈2 cm) was much smaller than the poloidal correlation
length (dθ ≈14 cm). This is also reﬂected by the high coherence, which was close to unity in
the observed frequency range. A completely different shape of both coherence and cross-phase
spectrum was observed in the parallel direction. In striking contrast to the high ﬁeld case the
coherence between toroidally separated probes was almost completely lost for frequencies
higher than ν ≈4 kHz, although both probes showed similar auto-power spectra, which were
ﬂat up to ν ≳10 kHz. In the frequency range of high coherence the parallel cross-phase
showed a well-deﬁned shape, but changed sign from negative values at very low frequencies
to positive values at higher frequencies. By deﬁnition, a negative phase shift represents a
wavenumber component pointing from the matrix to the reference probe and vice versa. The
conclusion to be drawn from this result is that the observed turbulent structures at the low
ﬁeld in WEGA cannot be described in the same manner as in the high ﬁeld case. The ‘blob’
representation, describing turbulence as an interaction of Fourier components with constant
ratio k∥/kθ (parallel wavefronts), does not hold anymore.
However, the average parallel cross-phase was formally derived for the spectra shown in
ﬁgure 8(b). It was rather small and corresponded quite well to the average poloidal cross-phase.
The spectra yielded average parallel and poloidal wavenumbers of ¯k∥= (0.085 ± 0.035) m−1
and ¯kθ = (0.08 ± 0.009) cm−1, respectively. Hence, the ratio ¯k∥/¯kθ agreed satisfactorily with
the results from the correlation analysis (¯k∥/¯kθ = δθ,0/Lc).
5. Discussion
The results presented give a detailed insight into the parallel dynamics of drift wave turbulence
under largely different discharge conditions in the WEGA stellarator. A heuristic model based
on drift wave theory was used to interpret the results which relied on only two measurement
points in the toroidal direction. The results agreed well with the assumptions made in the
model and thus the expectations for drift wave turbulence. At 500 mT, the averaged parallel
wavenumber, which was expected to be ﬁnite as we are dealing with drift waves, was found to
be ¯k∥= (0.51 ± 0.04) m−1. As expected for the large scales under consideration (¯kθρs ≪1)
the parallel phase velocity was far below the Alfv´en velocity, which is given as the upper limit
of v∥for small scales where a coupling between drift and Alfv´en dynamics becomes important
as, e.g., observed in TJ-K [10]. For the given discharge conditions the Alfv´en velocity was in
the order of vA ≈106 m s−1 ≫v∥for both low and high ﬁelds.
Poloidally resolved measurements with the probe array showed structures appearing
randomly at any point in the sampling region. This spatial homogeneity was obviously valid
only in a limited section like the sampling region of the array and not for a complete poloidal
turn. In toroidally resolved measurements a clear inhomogeneity was observed which was
independent of the magnetic ﬁeld direction (ﬁnite τ2 with constant sign). The observation of
a ﬁnite negative value of τ2, however, does not allow to give quantitative information about
the expansion time of structures. It only shows that there was an asymmetry and ﬂuctuations
arose on average closer to the array than to the reference probe. A possible interpretation of
this result is that turbulent structures preferably arise on the low ﬁeld side of the torus, i.e.
in the region of unfavourable magnetic curvature. Field lines departing from the matrix pass
the reference probe on their way to regions of favourable curvature regions. This is of course
in contrast to the argument of drift waves to be the dominating instability driving turbulence
in WEGA. Drift waves are not driven by magnetic curvature but by the density gradient.
However, fully developed turbulence in toroidal devices is based on, in general, both curvature
14Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
and density gradient driven instability mechanisms [28]. Although drift wave dynamics is
obviously dominating in WEGA, curvature effects may also play a role in turbulence activity.
A strong qualitative difference in the turbulence dynamics between low and high ﬁeld
operation was observed. At high ﬁeld, a vanishing cross-phase between the two points with
maximum correlation at τ = 0 was observed. This allows the interpretation that all Fourier
components contributing to the turbulent broadband spectrum have parallel wavevectors, i.e.
the ratio k∥/kθ was constant in the frequency range of high coherence.
At low ﬁeld, the spectrum of k∥showed positive and negative components in the
frequency range of high coherence standing for wavenumber components pointing parallel
and antiparallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. The small averaged value of ¯k∥= (0.085 ± 0.035) m−1
results from an averaging over components of different signs with a kind of skewness in the
spectrum towards positive values. In order to explain the actual shape of the k∥spectrum, it is
helpful to go back to the picture of planar waves. From a simple geometrical treatment it can
be shown that due to periodicity constraints in a toroidal device only parallel wavenumbers of
k∥= 1/R(ιn + m) are allowed to exist, where m and n are the integer toroidal and poloidal
modenumbers, respectively. In general, both m and n may be positive or negative. But they
are associated with the wavenumber component in the corresponding spatial direction and thus
the respective phase velocity component. The poloidal phase velocity of drift waves points
in the electron diamagnetic drift direction, as was observed in our experiments. This leads
to a constraint in the sign of n which is deﬁned to be positive in our case. Small values of
k∥< ι/R (≈0.3 m−1 in our case) are therefore only allowed for negative m corresponding
to k∥components pointing antiparallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. The appearance of negative k∥
components may, in this sense, be understood as a necessary part of the parallel turbulence
dynamics at low ﬁeld in WEGA in order to explain the small value of ¯k∥.
The reason for the striking difference between low and high ﬁeld operation of WEGA
cannot be clariﬁed here, but is possibly related to the observed perpendicular scaling lengths,
since at low ﬁeld the poloidal correlation length is in the order of the plasma dimensions.
Future experiments shall clarify whether the two types of parallel dynamics observed at
low and high magnetic ﬁelds obey a continuous transition by operating at intermediate magnetic
inductions.
References
[1] Stroth U et al 2004 Phys. Plasmas 11 2558–64
[2] Ribeiro T T and Scott B 2005 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 47 1657–79
[3] Rudyj A et al 1989 16th EPS Conf. on Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion (Venice, Italy) vol 13B pp 27–30
[4] Bleuel J et al 2002 New J. Phys. 4 38
[5] Thomsen H et al 2002 Phys. Plasmas 9 1233–40
[6] Ritz Ch P et al 1988 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 59 1739–44
[7] Winslow D L et al 1997 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68 396–99
[8] Bengtson R D et al 1998 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 38 104–9
[9] Endler M 1999 J. Nucl. Mater. 266–269 84–90
[10] Mahdizadeh N et al 2007 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 49 1005–17
[11] Marsen S et al 2008 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 48 467–72
[12] LaBombard B and Lipschultz B 1987 Nucl. Fusion 27 81–99
[13] Fenzi C et al 2000 Nucl. Fusion 40 1621–26
[14] Kirnev G S et al 2005 Nucl. Fusion 45 459–67
[15] Ramisch M et al 2008 35th EPS Conf. on Plasma Physics (Hersonissos, Crete, Greece) vol 32 P–4.028
[16] Wakatani M and Hasegawa A 1984 Phys. Fluids 27 611–18
[17] Kendl A et al 2003 Phys. Plasmas 10 3684–91
[18] Liewer P C 1985 Nucl. Fusion 25 543–621
[19] Horvath K et al 2006 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 48 315–23
15Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 (2009) 085005
S Marsen et al
[20] Podoba Y Y et al 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 255003
[21] Schubert M et al 2007 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 053505
[22] Pfeiffer U et al 1998 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 38 134–44
[23] Thomsen H et al 2001 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 41 530–36
[24] Jaenicke R et al 1993 Nucl. Fusion 33 687–704
[25] Otte M and Lingertat J 2002 29th EPS Conf. on Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion (Montreux, Switzerland)
vol 26B P 5.036
[26] Werner A 2006 private communication
[27] Terry P W and Diamond P H 1985 Phys. Fluids 28 1419–39
[28] Scott B D 2002 New J. Phys. 4 52
16