Review Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4, 219–237 (2015) / DOI 10.1002/andp.201400219
X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters:
a case study of lead-zirconate-titanate solid solutions
Johannes Frantti∗and Yukari Fujioka
Received 3 December 2014, revised 8 February 2015, accepted 20 February 2015
Published online 26 March 2015
Defects and frequently used defect models of solids are re-
viewed. Signatures for identifying the disorder from x-ray
and neutron scattering data are given. To give illustrative ex-
amples how technologically important defects contribute
to x-ray and neutron scattering numerical method able to
treat non-periodical solids possessing several simultane-
ous defect types is given for simulating scattering in nano-
size disordered clusters. The approach takes particle size,
shape, and defects into account and isolates element spe-
cific signals. As a case study a statistical approximation
model for lead-zirconate titanate [Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3, PZT] is in-
troduced. PZT is a material possessing several defect types,
including substitutional, displacement and surface defects.
Spatial composition variation is taken into account by in-
troducing a model in which the edge lengths of each cell
depend on the distribution of Zr and Ti ions in the cluster.
Spatially varying edge lengths and angles is referred to as
microstrain. The model is applied to compute the scatter-
ing from ellipsoid shaped PZT clusters and to simulate the
structural changes as a function of average composition.
Two-phase co-existence range, the so called morphotropic
phase boundary composition is given correctly. The compo-
sition at which the rhombohedral and tetragonal cells are
equally abundant was x ≈0.51. Selected x-ray and neu-
tron Bragg reflection intensities and line shapes were sim-
ulated. Examples of the effect of size and shape of the scat-
tering clusters on diffraction patterns are given and the par-
ticle dimensions, computed through Scherrer equation, are
compared with the exact cluster dimensions. Scattering
from two types of 180◦domains in spherical particles, one
type assigned to Ti-rich PZT and the second to the MPB and
Zr-rich PZT, is computed. We show how the method can be
used for modelling polarization reversal.
1 Introduction
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 summa-
rizes the basic concepts of x-ray and neutron scatter-
ing, Sections 1.2 and 1.3 review the models of disor-
dered materials and summarize the pair distribution
function method, respectively, and ﬁnally a brief re-
view of the crystal structures of lead-zirconate-titanate
[Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3, PZT] is given in Section 1.4. PZT was
chosen as an example material due to its wide use in
applications, which are often based on the controlled
use of defects. Section 2 describes the numerical method
applied in the present study. Section 2.1 describes the
method after which selected case studies on PZT clusters
are given in Sections 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4.
1.1 X-ray and neutron diffraction
Diffraction techniques, notably x-ray diffraction, are
the most commonly applied materials characterization
methods. The theory of x-ray scattering and diffraction
is well established and below key principles (see, e.g.,
ref. [1]) are given. The far-ﬁeld amplitude A(s) is given
by Eq. (1)
A(s) =
N

n
fne2πis·xn,
(1)
where N is the number of atoms in the scattering volume,
fn and xn are the scattering amplitude and the position
vector of the atom n, respectively, and s is the scattering
vector, depicted in Fig. 1. By denoting the unit propaga-
tion vectors of the incoming and scattered radiation of
wavelength λ by S0 and S respectively, s is (S −S0)/λ. In
∗Corresponding author E-mail: johannes.frantti@fre.fi
Finnish Research and Engineering Jaalaranta 9 B 42, 00180 Helsinki
Finland
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
219Review Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 1 Geometrical description of the scattering vector s.
crystals the intensity maxima correspond to the recipro-
cal lattice points s = ha∗+ kb∗+ lc∗, where a∗, b∗and c∗
are the reciprocal lattice vectors and h, k and l are inte-
gers. Eq. (1) can be generalized by replacing the discrete
atomic densities by a continuous electron density ρ(x):
A(s) =

ρ(x)e−2πis·xdvx,
(2)
so that A(s) is the Fourier transform of ρ(x). Inversely,
electron density is given by Eq. (3)
ρ(x) =

A(s)e2πis·xdvs.
(3)
The scattered intensity IN(s) is given by Eq. (4)
IN(s) = |A(s)|2
(4)
and, in terms of the convolution obtained by substitut-
ing Eq. (1) to Eq. (4), IN =
 
ρ(u)ρ(x + u)e−2πis·xdvudvx
which reads that the Fourier-transform of the autocor-
relation function (the Patterson function) equals to the
intensity. In the case of an inﬁnite crystal the electron
density can be expressed as a convolution between the
function representing the electron density inside a unit
cell and a series of Dirac functions representing the crys-
tal lattice. Fourier-transform of the convolution results in
the structure factor Fhkl and further gives the well-known
result according to which the intensity of the reﬂection
hkl is |Fhkl|2. Section 2 focuses on the nanosize clusters
which possess short-range order but lack translational
symmetry. The nanosize itself does not remove the trans-
lational symmetry: we consider cases in which each ‘unit
cell’ has own ‘lattice parameters’ (i.e., the assumption of
translational symmetry is abandoned).
If the absorption, extinction, thermal displacements,
angle dependent polarization corrections and instru-
ment related factors are not considered, the elastic scat-
tering intensity can readily be computed from Eq. (5)
once the atomic scale structure is known:
IN(s) =
N

n,n′
fn fn′ cos[2πs · (xn −xn′)].
(5)
Neutron diffraction intensity is modelled similarly,
the scattering amplitudes are replaced by nuclei n spe-
ciﬁc neutron scattering lengths b0(n). Since x-rays inter-
act with electrons and neutrons interact with nuclei the
techniques are in many ways complementary. In contrast
to x-rays, neutrons frequently scatter strongly from light
nuclei, such as oxygen and hydrogen, which is essen-
tially why neutrons suit for the determination of light el-
ements positions. The neutron scattering lengths of dif-
ferent isotopes are often quite different, even possessing
different signs, which has made isotope substitution a
technique for pinpointing structural details. Since neu-
trons possess a magnetic moment they interact with the
magnetic moments of electrons, the cross section be-
ing the same order of magnitude as the neutron-nuclear
interaction. Correspondingly, neutron scattering is the
most common method for determining magnetic order-
ing. Magnetic form factors used in the calculations of
the cross sections for magnetic scattering of neutrons are
given in terms of sums of exponential functions whose
coefﬁcients are tabulated in ref. [2]. The form factors
decay with increasing s so that often the minimum d-
spacing included in the magnetic scattering model is
≈1˚A. The form factors depend on the valence state of the
ions and thus it is frequently necessary to complement
neutron scattering data by alternative measurements to
clarify the valence state(s) of the ions. Since the scat-
tering power of atoms for neutrons is not Q-dependent
(Q = 4π sin θ/λ), in contrast to x-rays where the atomic
scattering factors fall away rapidly at high-Q, strong dif-
fuse scattering can be observed well beyond the Q-range
where Bragg peaks occur [3].
1.2 Common models for disordered systems
Computation of diffraction intensities is straightforward
once the positions of atoms are given (see, for instance
refs. [1] and [4]). The most challenging problem is to
ﬁnd the atomic scale structure (structural model) corre-
sponding to the measured intensity. Numerous recipes
to solve the problem have been developed, for instance
see refs. [4] and [5]. Space group symmetry determina-
tion from the Laue symmetry and the reﬂection condi-
tions, as obtained from the diffraction patterns, is given
in ref. [6]. At the ﬁnal stage of the structure solving task
220
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
one introduces a model which is reﬁned by adjusting
model parameters so that the difference between the
computed intensity and the measured intensity is min-
imized. A well-known reﬁnement technique for powders
is the Rietveld method [7, 8]. In the case of known av-
erage symmetry, Eq. (5) is not applied directly, but one
computes the squared value of the absolute value of the
structure factor, |Fhkl|2 of the Bragg reﬂection hkl. |Fhkl|2,
however, tells nothing about the linewidths or the shape
of the proﬁle function of the reﬂection. Numerous line
shapes were derived for different instruments and some-
times the choice of the proﬁle function for describing
the sample and instrument originating line broadening
is challenging. The broadening parameters are reﬁned as
a part of the structural model. More recently, instrument
related line broadening has also been computed from
the known diffractometer properties as summarized in
ref. [9]. In principle, direct application of Eq. (5) gives the
sample contribution to the lineshape.
Direct application of Eq. (5) is a heavy computa-
tional task even for relatively small atom clusters. Gen-
erally, the problem is challenging once the material
lacks periodicity at least in one dimension as even a
straightforward computation of the scattered intensity
from a collection of atoms with known positions be-
comes computationally formidable task (see, however,
Model #5 in section 1.2). Thus, to make structure solv-
ing or even reﬁnement possible approximations are
required. The most complex structures require tailored
solutions as they do not possess the high symmetry re-
quired by the commonly available programs.
Defects in solids. Defects in solids are classiﬁed as
zero-dimensional
(point
defects),
one-dimensional
(line
defects)
and
two-dimensional
(surfaces),
see
Fig. 2.
Point defects introduce a change in the scattering
power by interfering the coherence between scattered
waves by introducing a disturbance to the scattering
amplitudes (or lengths) and scatterer positions. In
diffraction experiments this effect is hardly seen if the
defect concentration is small. However, once the con-
centration increases not only is the scattering power
changing via change in average f (substitutional disor-
der) but also bond lengths and angles are spatially vary-
ing (displacement disorder). Mathematical treatment of
displacement disorder correlated with substitutional dis-
order in solid-solutions is given in ref. [1]. Phenomeno-
logically the displacement disorder following the substi-
tutional disorder can be described using the concept of
microstrain introduced in ref. [10] and it is commonly
used to model the hkl-dependent line broadening in
Rietveld reﬁnement: for instance GSAS [11] Rietveld re-
ﬁnement software has an option to use proﬁle functions
with microstrain broadening formulated in ref. [10].
Table 1 summarizes common disorder types observed
in solids and the characteristic signatures in x-ray
scattering and diffraction.
The models given in Table 1 may appear rather spe-
ciﬁc. However, the tabulated signatures are also found
in more general cases. For instance, the signal related
to the displacement disorder increases with increasing
reﬂection index and vanishes for small values of s. The
signatures can be used for distinguishing different struc-
tural models. For example, both sinusoidal composi-
tion modulation and sinusoidal displacement modula-
tion produce satellite reﬂections at the same d-spacing,
if the propagation vector is the same. The two cases can
be identiﬁed by their different intensity dependencies.
Also the case of correlated substitutional and displace-
ment disorder can be distinguished from the plain sub-
stitutional and plain displacement disorder by the char-
acteristic asymmetric intensity of the satellite peaks of
each pair. We note that the pure size-related line broad-
ening gives the same particle size estimate, no matter
which reﬂection is chosen. However, if the broadening
is not solely due to the particle size it is important to
correctly model the disorder. Section 2 considers several
cases in which non-periodical displacement and substi-
tutional disorder are correlated and the results are found
to be consistent with the observations seen in periodi-
cally modulated cases.
Model #1 is a common and straightforward way to de-
scribe scattering from a well-mixed solid solution formed
by not-too-different size constituent elements. The suc-
cess of the Model #1 is essentially due to the fact that
diffraction tends to emphasize average structure and to
suppress deviations from it. However, if the composi-
tion and atomic scattering factors vary periodically, for
instance as a sine wave form with a propagation vec-
tor k, then the Bragg peaks (principal nodes) are sur-
rounded by satellites at distances ±k of each Bragg
peak.
In the case of a pure sinusoidal composition vari-
ation (in contrast to displacement disorder Models
#3 and #4 which also exhibit characteristic satellite
peaks) the ratio of the intensity of the satellite reﬂec-
tions to that of the corresponding Bragg peak inten-
sity is a constant for all the nodes. Following ref. [1],
if atomic scattering factor varies as a sine wave,
fn = f (1 + η cos 2πk · xn), then the diffracted wave am-
plitude is  fn exp(−2πis · xn) =  f exp(−2πis · xn) +
f η
2 exp[−2πi(s −k) · xn] + f η
2 exp[−2πi(s + k) · xn]. Thus,
diffraction pattern exhibits two satellites at distances ±k
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
221
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 2 Examples of point, line and two-dimensional crystal defects, which frequently occur together. Point defects include substitute
atoms, vacancies and interstitial atoms and are accompanied by a local strain field. Edge dislocations are common in thin film multilayer
structures and occur when the mismatch between the thin film layer and substrate is so large that strain is energetically unfavourable.
Domains in ferroelectrics and magnetic materials dictate the materials response to external field.
of each node, with intensities which are η2/4 times that
of the principal node.
Model #2 is a well-known description of the atomic
displacement originated diffuse scattering implemented
in every standard Rietveld reﬁnement software. Model #5
is based on the generation of a scattering object from two
types of layers A and B with proportions mA and 1 −mA,
respectively. Layers are added to the lattice one at a time
and the probability of the new layer being an A or B type
is dependent only on the preceding layer [3]. The scat-
tering object is constructed using conditional probabil-
ities P(0|0) = 1 −α, P(1|0) = α, P(0|1) = 1 −α −β and
P(1|1) = α + β, where 1 (0) denotes that the site is oc-
cupied by an A (B)-type layer. In the case of an inﬁnite
number of layers rather simple expression is obtained for
the diffuse intensity, see Model #5 in Table 1.
Model #5 is an example of a model suitable for
describing a layer-by-layer crystal growth. Contempo-
rary growth chambers are often equipped with the in
situ monitoring facilities, such as Reﬂection High En-
ergy Electron Diffraction facility allowing to ensure the
growth of correct type of layers [12]. Optimization of
growth parameters includes the adjustment of substrate
temperature, gas atmosphere (e.g., oxygen gas pressure)
and deposition rate related parameters (such as laser
beam ﬂuence in pulsed laser ablation deposition or sput-
tering power). During in situ monitoring one observes
the diffraction pattern and, if required, conducts pa-
rameter adjustment until a correct phase is formed. In
the case of a single layer it is rather straightforward
to observe when a correct diffraction pattern emerges.
Model #5 and their extensions are amenable for in situ
modelling of multilayer thin ﬁlm structures consisted of
stacked thin layers possessing different types of layers.
Dislocations come in many forms as do their struc-
tural models. Model #6 summarizes the angle dependent
features for high dislocation densities. Dislocations pos-
sess technologically interesting problems as they are of-
ten strongly responding to external stimulus and thus are
time-dependent. The atomic scale structure is not only
different in dislocation core but the atomic positions
close to a dislocation are different from the surrounding
matrix [13, 14], making them visible through scattering
techniques. In thin ﬁlms edge dislocations have a cru-
cial role as they are favoured over the stressed thin ﬁlm
state once the mismatch between the substrate and thin
ﬁlm exceeds a threshold value [15, 16], see Fig. 3. The
plasticity of metals is explained in terms of dislocations.
222
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
Table 1 Common disorder types and models and characteristic signatures for solids as compiled from refs. [1] (#1–#4), [3] (#5), and [17]
(#6). Type #1: The case of a simple lattice whose nodes are occupied by atoms A, B, . . . . The relative proportions of the atoms are
labelled as cA, cB, . . . . and the corresponding scattering factors as fA, fB, . . . . The average structure factor is ¯F. The xm is the
vector connecting an atom pair m. Type #2: A model for thermal displacement disorder. FWHM, full-width-at-half-maximum, D,
Debye-Waller factor. Type #3: Periodical modulation. Type #4: Structure is modulated by a sinusoidal distortion, propagation vector
k, |k| = 1
	. Type #5: One-dimensional model for diffuse scattering based on the nearest-neighbour Markov chain. K is a constant
determined by mA and the layer form factors FA and FB. Type #6: Dislocations.
Model
Disorder type
Mathematical model
Signature
Examples
#1
Substitutional
F = cA fA + cB fB + · · ·
I2 = 
0 + 2 ∞
1 +
m cos
(2πs · xm)
0 = f 2n −( ¯F)2

m = ( fn −¯F)( fn+m −¯F)
Diffraction pattern is similar to
the one possessing a
translational symmetry:
instead of elemental
scattering factors certain
sites possess an average
scatterer ¯F.
Solid-solutions of similar size
atoms. The most common
way to model
solid-solutions by the
Rietveld refinement.
#2
Displacement,
Debye-Waller D
Fn = f exp(−2πis · xn)
D = exp( 16π2 sin2 θ
λ2
x2n
3 )
Part of the diffraction line
intensity is shifted to the
background. FWHM value of
the peak is unaffected.
Isotropic thermal motion
of an atom.
#3
Displacement
xn = 	ε
2π cos( 2πna
	 )
A pair of satellite peaks of
equal intensity 	2ε2l2
4a2
are
surrounding each reflection
l.
Nonhomogeneous Cu-Ni-Fe.
#4
Correlated Substitutional
and Displacement
fn = f (1 + η sin 2πna
	 ),
xn = na + xn = na −	ε
2π cos 2πna
	
Ratio of the intensities of the
satellites to the normal node
is asymmetric:
( 	εs+η
2
)2, s = n
a −1
	
( 	εs−η
2
)2, s = n
a + 1
	
Solid solutions of different size
atoms.
#5
Substitutional
Probability of the new layer an A or B
depends only on the immediately
preceding layer.
I(s) = K
1−β2
1+β2−2β cos(2πs·a)
Layer-by-layer crystal growth
when only short range
forces are important.
#6
Dislocation
At high dislocation densities
peak broadening ∞tan θ.
Dislocation cores also serve as a diffusion path in many
materials.
Fig. 4 shows schematically why the models applied
to data collected on commonly used Bragg-Brentano ge-
ometry can give misleading information in the case of
multilayers. First, the net intensity is not a simple su-
perposition of the intensities scattered from individual
layers and substrate but involves interfacial layers. Sec-
ond, especially in the case of epitaxial thin ﬁlms the scat-
tering should be considered to take place in a large en-
tity formed by different layers: in terms of the Eq. (5) the
summation involves all the atomic pairs in the multi-
layer structure. In-situ scattering measurements on crys-
tal growth is becoming a routine experimental tech-
niques and thus models for layer-by-layer growth are re-
quired. Modelling techniques based on the Markov chain
and Ising models are described in ref. [3].
Similarly the structure in the vicinity of the domain
wall separating the different domains also has an atomic
scale structure different from either of the domains.
In 180◦domain boundary the polarization direction is
smoothly reversed [18] which is accompanied by a spa-
tial variation of atomic positions. The modelling task of
multilayer thin ﬁlms and domain structures is similar
and is given in Section 2.4.
1.3 Pair distribution function method
Even though isotropic disordered materials, such as a
glass or an amorphous material, do not have a long-
range order, they nearly always possess short-range or-
der. Neutron and x-ray scattering techniques are com-
monly used for determining the distribution function
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
223
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 3 Different interface types formed
between material layers.
Figure 4 Schematic picture of a common θ −2θ measurement
geometry. X-rays penetrate into the substrate and the signal is
originating from the thin film, interface layer and the substrate.
Common approximation is to correspondingly divide the signal
into three parts, though this is not necessarily justified.
P(x) giving the statistics of atom pairs. Following the
treatment given in ref. [1], the principle of the pair dis-
tribution function (PDF) method can be formulated by
expressing the interference function S(s) in terms of the
scattered intensity IN(s) and structure factor F(s), form-
ing the average over all orientations of the vector x con-
necting the atoms of the pair with respect to the scatter-
ing vector s (the sample is assumed to be isotropic), and
expressing the interference function in terms of the pair
distribution functions, Eqs. (6):
S(s) =
IN(s)
NF 2(s) = 1 + ρ0
 ∞
0
4πx2[P(x) −1]sin(2πsx)
2πsx
dx,
(6)
where ρ0 is the number of atoms of all types per unit
volume.
The
reverse
Fourier
transform
of
the
interfer-
ence
function
gives
ρ0x[P(x) −1] = 2
 ∞
0 [S(s) −
1] sin(2πsx)sds, which thus would require that S(s)
is experimentally determined in all of reciprocal space.
Instead, a common way is to construct a structural
model and compute the PDF function, compare it
with the experimental data and optimize the model
parameters to minimize the difference between the
computed and measured intensity. Rather recently, a
new method for the calculation of x-ray and neutron
powder diffraction patterns from the Debye scattering
equation was given in ref. [19]. PDF functions were
computed as an intermediate stage for computing the
diffraction patterns. The method is based on the splitting
of pairwise atomic interactions into two contributions,
the ﬁrst from lattice-pair vectors and the second from
cell-pair vectors. Illustrative application examples of
the PDF method can be found from ref. [20], with an
emphasis on the neutron scattering studies of silica.
In order to contrast the method described below and
the PDF method we note that the latter suits well for
extracting information from homogeneously disordered
materials, whereas the present method is aimed to
224
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
provide information about spatially conﬁned defects,
such as domain boundary. In the present work we also
pinpoint the spatial location of the defect.
1.4 Solid-solution with correlated substitutional and
displacement disorder: lead-zirconate-titanate
Despite its long-history [21] PZT is still an intensively
studied ferroelectric oxide [22] exhibiting exceptionally
high piezoelectric properties when the amount of tita-
nium and zirconium is roughly equal [21, 23]. Numerous
space group assignments for nominally similar samples
can be found in the literature (for reviews, see refs. [24,
25]), which is essentially due to the local-scale disorder
modelled by different low-symmetry structures.
Average symmetries. PZT has a perovskite ABO3 crys-
tal structure in which the B-cation site is statistically
occupied by Ti and Zr ions. Metrically, the structure is
close to a cube in which Pb cations are approximately at
the cube corner, Zr and Ti cations are at the cube cen-
tre and oxygen anions are close the cube face centres. A
well-known summary of the composition and temper-
ature dependent phases of PZT is given by the phase
diagram of ref. [21]. Titanium-rich structure is tradition-
ally modelled by assuming an ideal space group sym-
metry (P4mm for x ≤0.52), which is achieved by plac-
ing a compositionally averaged ‘pseudo-atom’ at the B
site. The anions and cations are displaced from the cen-
trosymmetric positions along positive and negative c-
axis direction, respectively. For Zr-rich concentrations
the average structure is rhombohedral, the anion and
cation displacements being along the cube diagonal. No-
tably challenging is the x ≈0.50 composition at which
the two phases co-exist [26]. The two-phase co-existence
is typically modelled by reﬁning the total intensity by
the superposition of the intensities from the pseudo-
tetragonal and pseudo-rhombohedral phases.
The average crystal structures of PZT as a func-
tion of x can be summarized thus: at room tempera-
ture the crystal structure remains tetragonal up to x ≈
0.52 at which composition (termed the morphotropic
phase boundary, MPB) a rather complex set of phases
emerges, including a monoclinic Cm phase [27–29] and
co-existing low and high-temperature rhombohedral
phases [28, 29]. As pointed out in ref. [30] there is no
real boundary and the phase co-existence region is ex-
tended close to the PbZrO3 end of the solid-solution sys-
tem. It is evident that the Cm phase exists as judged by
several high-resolution powder diffraction studies, but
the phase transition mechanism resulting in an aver-
age Cm phase, and even the stability of the phase, is
still under investigation as it is often linked to the ex-
traordinary piezoelectric properties of PZT at the MPB
composition. A thermodynamical study showed that an
8th-order Devonshire theory is required to explain the
monoclinic phase [31], suggesting that the transition is
quite unusual. This was also discussed in ref. [32], where
a two-order-parameter thermodynamic model was de-
veloped for PZT to account for its peculiar features. An
early report of the Cm phase in a ferroelectric perovskite
oxide is about PbNb0.5Fe0.5O3 (PNF) compound [33, 34].
In the case of PZT the Cm phase has often been claimed
to favour polarization rotation and further to be respon-
sible for the good piezoelectric properties. We note that
also in the case of PNF the Fe3+ and Nb5+ cations are
disordered. The fact that the monoclinic symmetry only
tells that the polarization vector is within a mirror plane
m does not mean that the polarization can rotate within
m. Nevertheless, it has been proposed that a continu-
ous polarization rotation between the [001] and [111] di-
rections along the plane the two direction vectors span
would be energetically preferable [35]. However, we do
not adopt that view as detailed in refs. [25] and [36]. In-
stead, to understand the polarization reversal we focus
on the domain wall and wall motion, which involve fairly
complex time-dependent structural changes [23].
At higher values of x the dominant phase can, to
a good approximation, be described as rhombohedral,
there being two variants, with (R3c, at low tempera-
tures) and without (R3m, at high temperatures) octahe-
dral tilts. More precisely, a recent PDF and Rietveld re-
ﬁnement study has shown that Zr-rich Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3
powders possess mixed phases, described by R3c/R3m +
Cm(MB) model for 0.65 < x < 0.92 and R3c/R3m +
Cm(MA) model for 0.52 < x < 0.65, where MA and MB re-
fer to two polarization direction variants of the Cmphase
[37]. Neutron diffraction [38] and high-resolution x-ray
diffraction [39] studies veriﬁed the rhombohedral sym-
metry and also revealed the presence of the monoclinic
phase (assigned to Cm symmetry in ref. [38]), providing
further support to the idea that the monoclinic phase is
not due to the presence of adaptive phases. At the high-
est values of x, an antiferroelectric orthorhombic phase
is formed.
Deviations from average symmetries: Signatures of
disorder in PZT. Though the crystal structure models
are sufﬁcient for explaining an average structure, they
are insufﬁcient when local scale structure is considered.
For instance, Raman measurements reveal that the
spectra are not consistent with the average crystal struc-
ture [40–42]: the number of Raman active modes is about
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
225
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 5 (a) Schematic illustration of a solid-
solution,(b)typicalaveragingand(c)anapproxima-
tion which takes the local disorder into account.
twice the number corresponding to an ideal structure.
In diffraction experiments disorder affects the inten-
sity distribution: The fraction of inelastically scattered
intensity is increased (as discussed below in the con-
text of atomic displacement parameter (ADP)) and the
tail regions of the Bragg reﬂection gain intensity. The
displacement disorder can be divided into Pb displace-
ments (off-site A-cations) and different positions of the
B-cations, Zr and Ti [30, 43–47]. Large off-centre Pb
displacements are common in perovskite oxides [33,
48–51]. Randomly distributed Zr and Ti atoms cause
locally varying bond lengths and angles, frequently
approximated by introducing so called microstrain. In
contrast to the ADP induced diffuse scattering the reﬂec-
tion widths are hkl-dependent in microstrained samples.
A random distribution of Zr and Ti results in correspond-
ing distribution of Pb displacements. If the point defect
concentration is sufﬁciently small (of the order of
x = 0.01 or less) so that the long-range order charac-
teristic to the crystal symmetry is not changed, defects
mainly contribute to the intensity of the tail areas around
the Bragg reﬂections: diffuse scattering is increased,
whereas elastic scattering is decreased. The effect is most
clearly seen at small d-spacing area (see, e.g., ref. [17]).
Correspondingly, point defects are frequently seen as
abnormal ADP’s, which are either anomalously large
or unphysically small: even diagonal components can
be negative. This issue is addressed in ref. [5]. The
negative values can be due to the fact that ADP’s try to
model two separate types of disorder, dynamic (thermal
vibrations) and static (substitutional and/or positional
disorder). Small substitute atomic concentrations are
seldom capable of introducing large changes in x-ray
scattering intensities (unless there is a large difference in
the numbers of electrons of the atoms) though they may
result in detectable changes in neutron scattering. Point
defect concentrations of a fraction of at.% may, however,
result in observable changes in bond lengths [52].
At large point defect concentration it is better to
abandon the concept of well-ordered host crystal with
point defects and to model the system from the begin-
ning. Fig. 5 schematically illustrates a binary solid so-
lution and the commonly used approximation in which
one does not make a distinction between the two types
of atoms, but only considers a pseudoatom taken to pos-
sess a scattering amplitude formed as a composition
weighted average of the scattering amplitudes of the two
atoms. Three-dimensional periodicity is commonly in-
troduced in a similar manner. Thus, the disorder is aver-
aged away as it is a heavy task to compute the scattering
intensity corresponding to a huge unit cell. Below we in-
troduce an approximation which keeps the essential fea-
tures of the solid-solution, namely the inhomogeneous
distribution of two types of atoms and the correspond-
ing variation in bond lengths, corresponding to the case
illustrated in Fig. 5(c).
2 Scattering from PZT clusters
A method for modelling the local structure under the
constraint that the average structure remains intact was
recently developed [53] and applied for addressing the
cation displacements as a function of hydrostatic pres-
sure [54]. Central part of the modelling work is the pa-
rameterization of the disorder. As in the case of crystals
with well-deﬁned space group symmetries there is a re-
quirement to ﬁll the space exactly once. This sets limits to
the cells and their mutual connectivity. A straightforward
way to do this is given below. Focus is on the construc-
tion of a model which takes the disorder into account yet
is computationally sufﬁciently simple. We ﬁrst describe
how a single scattering cluster is constructed. The mate-
rial to be modelled can entirely be consisted of a single
scattering cluster, or as a special case the cluster can be a
unit cell in a crystallographical sense.
Next section introduces the parameters used in this
paper after which application examples are given.
2.1 Generation of the scattering cluster
Below a construction of a model of a combined substitu-
tional and displacement disorder is given. The inﬂuence
of the crystal size and shape on the peak proﬁles is taken
into account. Scattering intensity is computed for single
clusters. The program was written using the C-language
and a message passing interface (MPI). Computational
226
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
Table 2 Fractional coordinates of the atoms in
pseudo-tetragonal and pseudo-rhombohedral structures.
Structural parameters x(Pb), y(Pb), z(Pb), z(Zr), z(Ti) and z(O)
were computed for each cell i, j, k by bond-valence sum
method.
Tetragonal structure
Atom
x
y
z
Pb
x(Pb)
y(Pb)= x(Pb)
z(Pb) = x(Pb)
Zr
1
2
1
2
1
2 + z(Zr)
Ti
1
2
1
2
1
2 + z(Ti)
0I
1
2
1
2
z(O)
0II
0
1
2
1
2 + z(O)
0III
1
2
0
1
2 + z(O)
Rhombohedral structure
Atom
x
y
z
Pb
x(Pb)
y(Pb)= x(Pb)
z(Pb) = x(Pb)
Zr
1
2 + z(Zr)
1
2 + z(Zr)
1
2 + z(Zr)
Ti
1
2 + z(Ti)
1
2 + z(Ti)
1
2 + z(Ti)
0I
1
2
1
2
z(O)
0II
0
1
2
1
2 + z(O)
0III
1
2
0
1
2 + z(O)
platform was provided by the CSC (Finnish IT Center for
Science Ltd., administered by the Ministry of Education,
Science and Culture).
We ﬁrst generate a scattering cluster in which each
ion is placed on a speciﬁc site (described below). Ti and
Zr are statistically distributed after which the atomic po-
sitions are adjusted. Speciﬁcally, each cell in the clus-
ter is either tetragonal or rhombohedral and the ion po-
sitions are relaxed accordingly. The relaxed structural
parameters are tabulated in Table 2. Atomic positions are
adjusted by bond-valence-sum method [55].
Initial parameters. Experimental room-temperature
structural values of PbTiO3 and PbZrO3 are used for gen-
erating the initial values for the scattering cluster. In this
stage, also alternative methods could be used. The lattice
parameters for PbTiO3 are: aT = bT = 3.9000 ˚A and cT =
4.1500 ˚A and for PbZrO3 the lattice parameters are aZ =
bZ = cZ = 4.138 ˚A. Though PbZrO3 is orthorhombic, we
average the structure to be cubic (space group Pm¯3m).
For the computation of the scattering power the posi-
tions of the ions are referred to points i, j, k which give
Table 3 Coefficients for analytical approximation to the x-ray
scattering factors f and the neutron scattering lengths b0,
taken from ref. [2]. Scattering factors are computed using the
approximation f = z + 
i ai exp(−bis2), where
s = sin θ/λ. Anomalous dispersion coefficients are f1 and f2
(real and imaginary parts, respectively), the given values
correspond to the Cu Kα-radiation (λ = 1.540562 ˚A). The
Bragg diffraction angle is labelled as θ and λ is the x-ray
wavelength.
Parameter
Pb
Zr
Ti
O
b0
9.405
7.16
−3.370
5.803
z
13.4118
2.06929
1.28070
0.250800
a1
31.0617
17.8765
9.75950
3.04850
b1
0.690200
1.27618
7.85080
13.2771
a2
13.0637
10.9480
7.35580
2.28680
b2
2.35760
11.9160
0.500000
5.70110
a3
18.4420
5.41732
1.69910
1.54630
b3
8.61800
0.117622
35.6338
0.323900
a4
5.96960
3.65721
1.90210
0.867000
b4
47.2579
87.6627
116.105
32.9089
f1
−4.075
−0.186
0.219
0.049
f2
8.506
2.245
1.807
0.032
the origins of the cells. In the special case of a scatter-
ing volume possessing translational symmetry the points
i, j, k form a crystallographical lattice. Here the focus is
on the cases lacking translational symmetry.
The structure of the cells depends on the Zr con-
centration: at high titanium concentrations the cells
are tetragonal, at x ≈0.50 two phases co-exist and at
high Zr-concentrations rhombohedral cells are domi-
nant. This feature is embedded in the model as described
in ﬂow chart 2.1.
Table 2 lists the sites in tetragonal and rhombohedral
cells and Table 3 lists the neutron scattering lengths and
coefﬁcients used for the computation of x-ray scattering
factors.
Flow chart. Flowchart describing the steps involved in
the scattering cluster construction.
1. The size of the scattering cluster is given in terms of
parallel epipeds, or cells. In the present example a
rectangular parallel epiped cluster, consisted of Nx ×
Ny × Nz cells, is constructed. Each cell is referred to by
indices i = 0, . . . , Nx, j = 0, . . . , Ny and k = 0, . . . , Nz.
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
227
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 6 (a) The compatibility between adjacent cells is fulfilled
with spatially varying cell edge lengths. Though the cell edge
lengths are spatially varying they are continuously connected and
discontinuities, illustrated in (b), are avoided. For simplicity, the
angles are taken to be orthogonal, which however is not a require-
ment of the method.
2. Atoms are placed into the initial sites according to
Table 2. Either Ti or Zr is inserted into each cell
with probabilities 1 −x and x, respectively. A random
number generator is used for this purpose.
3. The disorder to be modelled is correlated substitu-
tional and displacement type caused by the random
distribution of Ti and Zr ions. For modelling purpose
we use three sum functions cx(i), cy( j) and cz(k). cx(i)
gives the number of Zr atoms in planes i = constant,
constant being 1, 2, . . . , Nx. Functions cy( j) and cz(k)
posses similar meaning.
4. Cell edges are readjusted so that the compatibility
condition is fulﬁlled. Fig. 6 illustrates the compati-
bility in two-dimensional case. The cell edges ax(i),
ay( j), and az(k) are relaxed either to be rhombohedral
or tetragonal:
if cx(i) ≥NyNz/2.0 and cy( j) ≥NxNz/2.0 and cz(k)
≥NxNy/2.0
ax(i) = (a2
TcT)1/3 + Kx(cx(i) + cy( j) + cz(k))/3.0
∗(aZ −(a2
TcT)1/3)/(NyNz)
ay( j) = (a2
TcT)1/3 + Kx(cx(i) + cy( j) + cz(k))/3.0
∗(aZ −(a2
TcT)1/3)/(NxNz)
az(k) = (a2
TcT)1/3 + Kx(cx(i) + cy( j) + cz(k))/3.0
∗(aZ −(a2
TcT)1/3)/(NxNy)
else
ax(i) = aT + Kx(aZ −aT)cx(i)/(NyNz)
ay( j) = bT + Kx(bZ −bT)cy( j)/(NzNx)
az(k) = cT + Kx(cZ −cT)cz(k)/(NxNy).
Thus, both rhombohedral and tetragonal cells can co-
exists within a same cluster. To further simplify the
model, the largest rhombohedral cell is determined
after which all rhombohedral cells are constrained
to have this size. This also ensures that all cells are
continuously connected to adjacent cells. A param-
eter Kx (≈1) is introduced. This is related to the fact
that average B valence exceeds 4 in Zr-rich PZT (x ≥
0.54). To obtain nominal valence the cell volume is
gradually expanded by increasing the value of Kx till
atoms can be positioned so that they possess nominal
valences.
For simplicity, linear relationship between lattice
constants and sum functions is assumed. We also
assume that the same composition variation causes
the same structural variation in the x and y direc-
tions. This also implies that for a single phase clus-
ter the average values of ax and ay, respectively de-
noted as ⟨ax⟩and ⟨ay⟩, are equal. This is because
i=N
i=1 cx(i) =  j=N
j=1 cy( j) = NZr, where NZr is the num-
ber of Zr atoms in the cluster. The relationships are no
longer true for clusters possessing co-existing tetrag-
onal and rhombohedral cells. By giving up these con-
ditions one could approach more complex cases. We
also assume that x, y and z directions are orthogonal.
5. Cation positions are adjusted to fulﬁl the nominal
bond-valence sums, described below.
6. Parallel epiped shaped particles are hardly seen in
real materials, so an ellipsoidal cut of the clus-
ter is formed. The semiaxes of ellipsoids, including
spheres, are chosen to be parallel to the cell edge di-
rections. Rounded cluster has a feature that the sub-
sidiary maxima are diminished, in contrast to the par-
allel epiped clusters.
7. The scattering power of the cluster is computed by
Eq. (5) for selected directions. Directions are given in
terms of s = ha∗+ kb∗+ lc∗, where a∗= ˆx/⟨ax⟩, b∗=
ˆy/⟨ay⟩and c∗= ˆz/⟨az⟩, where ˆx, ˆy, and ˆz are unit vec-
tors parallel to the positive x, y and z-axis directions,
respectively. The scattering power is multiplied by
Lorentz factor (Eq. (A1)) in the case of neutrons, and
by the Lp factor (Eq. (A2)) in the case of x-rays, see
Appendix I.
Bond-valence-sum based atomic position adjustment.
Bond-valence-sum (BVS) method [55] is applied to cal-
culate the cation positions with respect to the oxygen
polyhedra. Alternative computational techniques, such
as using empirical potentials for structure optimiza-
tion, or experimental techniques, could also be used.
In the model Zr and Ti cations are displaced along the
c-axis direction if the cell is tetragonal, otherwise the
228
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
Figure 7 Statistical distribution of the Pb-
cation displacements as a function of x.
Yellow, green and blue colour indicates the
single phase tetragonal, two-phase and
rhombohedral areas, respectively. Worth
to note is that the peaks are broadest
in the two-phase region. In each cell Pb-
cations are displaced along the cell diag-
onal. Pb-displacements increase with in-
creasing x.
Figure 8 Statistical distribution of the Zr and Ti-cation displacements from oxygen octahedra centre as a function of x. Red and blue
colour indicates Ti- and Zr cations positions, respectively. The left-hand column gives the displacements in the single phase region,
whereas the centre and right-hand columns give the displacements in the two-phase co-existence region. Left-hand column shows how
the cation distribution broadens with increasing x, in strong contrast with models based on the translational symmetry. Worth to note
is that not only Zr but also Ti displacements are rather small at Zr-rich compositions (note the scale differences in Frequency axis). This
suggests that the Pb-displacements significantly contribute to the dipole moment at MPB. The role of Zr is to stretch the cells so that Pb
ions are forced to be significantly displaced from cuboctahedra centres in order to achieve nominal valence. See also text.
displacement is along the cell diagonal (the rhombohe-
dral cells). Lead cations, consistently with the experi-
mental observations, are always displaced along the cell
diagonal.
As the cells are too tight for Zr (there is no position
at which the Zr valence would be +4), the Zr positions
are ﬁrst adjusted so that Zr valences are minimized, after
which the Ti positions are adjusted so that the average
valence is 4. If the average valence is above 4, the cell size
is increased by increasing the parameter Kx, see item 4 in
ﬂow chart 2.1.
2.2 Single domain spherical clusters
To address the local structural changes and microstrain
spherical clusters with a radius of 18 cell lengths (Nx =
Ny = Nz = 36) are generated.
Correlated substitutional and displacement disorder.
PZT is evidently a material in which displacement
disorder follows substitutional disorder: volumes with
high Zr-concentration have larger cells. The distribu-
tion of B-cations itself is assumed to be random as
described in ﬂow chart 2.1. Figures 7 and 8 show
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
229
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 9 Composition dependent fraction of the rhombohedral cells, panel (a), average lattice parameter values, taken from the known
cluster parameters (blue data points) and average lattice parameter values obtained from the Bragg equation (red data points), panel (b),
cluster dimensions (cluster values are given by blue markers and values obtained from the Scherrer equation are plotted by red markers),
panel (c) and the difference between the true and lattice parameters obtained through the Bragg equation, panel (d). Squares, circles and
triangles indicate the a, band c axes values. Red and blue diamonds (panel (c)) correspond to the values extracted from the 222 reflection
positions and the sphere dimension along the ⟨111⟩direction, respectively. Green shadow indicates the two-phase co-existence region,
also referred to as the MPB region. Letters T, M and R stand for the tetragonal, mixed and rhombohedral region, respectively.
the
A- and
B-cation displacements as a function
of x.
Model indicates rather small displacement of Zr and
Ti cations from the oxygen octahedra centre at and in
the vicinity of the MPB region. The model predicts that
the ferroelectric polarization is essentially due to the Pb
and Ti cation displacements. Above x > 0.40 it is essen-
tially the Pb-displacements which are responsible for po-
larization in PZT. The increasing width of the cation dis-
placement distribution with increasing x indicates larger
deviation from the average symmetry: In the case of
perfect translational symmetry all A- and all B-cation
displacements would be peaked at a single value. Also
the number of displaced B-cations is strongly decreas-
ing with increasing x: The B-cation displacements are
centred close to the oxygen octahedron centre when
x ≈0.40. As Fig. 7 shows, the width of the Pb-cation
displacements is largest in the two-phase region (green
data). It is also evident that the Pb-ion displacements
are increasing with increasing x. As was discussed in
ref. [54], the B-cation displacements are probably under-
estimated: If one gives up the constraint that the aver-
age valence of B-cations should be +4 and that the Pb-
cation should have a valence of +2 and replaces it with
a less severe constraint that the sum of the two types of
cations should be +6 then the B-cations can be displaced
by a larger amount also at Zr-rich areas. This would be
compensated by a smaller Pb-displacements. However,
such a computation would require an energy minimiza-
tion. The BVS values do not necessarily correspond to the
energy minimum, though it is reasonable to assume that
they are not too far off as the BVS parameters are based
on a ﬁt to a vast number of experimental data. It is rea-
sonable to assume that most reported structures corre-
spond to the energy minimum.
Cluster and cell dimensions. Fig. 9(a) shows the num-
ber of rhombohedral cells as a function of x. The model
is seen to be consistent with the known MPB composi-
tion (green shadows in Fig. 9(a)–(d)), as the strong in-
crease onset at ≈0.47 shows. This implies that relatively
straightforward statistical approach (given in ﬂow chart
2.1) is capable of explaining the two-phase co-existence.
The two-phase coexistence within a same cluster affects
the line-shapes in the two-phase regions, resulting in
less accurate lattice parameter values in the MPB region,
see Fig. 9(d). Fig. 9(c) plots the cluster dimensions and
compares the dimensions to the values obtained through
230
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
Figure 10 Particle size as estimated from the apparent full-width-at-half-maximum values of the x-ray scattering reflections. Open
squares, filled diamonds, filled circles and filled triangles are values estimated from the h00, 0k0, 00l and hhh reflections, respec-
tively. Only x = 0.51 cluster shows evident reflection indice dependent broadening, implying that the broadening is not solely due to
the particle size.
Figure 11 Neutron scattering intensity of the h00, 00l, and hhhtype reflections. Upper row shows the intensity computed for the PbTiO3
cluster and the lower row the intensity computed for the x = 0.51 cluster. The combined substitutional and displacement disorder is
evident in x = 0.51 cluster, as is seen from the numerous satellite reflections. Also notable is the asymmetry of the intensity of the
satellite peaks on the larger and smaller 2θ side of the main peak. The asymmetry is much larger than the impact of the Lorentz factor.
the Scherrer equation:
Dp = 4/3(π/6)1/3λ/(θ f whm cos θ)
(7)
where θ and λ are the Bragg peak centre position and
wavelength values and θ f whm is the full-width-at-half-
maximum of the Bragg peak. All angles are given in
radians. The constant is characteristic to the spherical
shaped particles. The maximum dimension of the clus-
ter is slightly larger than the value obtained from the
Scherrer equation. This is partially due to the fact that the
cluster is not exactly a sphere but is consisted of pseu-
docubic cells so that the maximum dimension, given by
blue markers in Fig. 9(c) are slightly larger than the di-
ameter of the spherical surface ﬁt to go as close to the
cluster exterior as possible. We note that the line broad-
ening due to the particle size effect alone yields an
apparent size which is independent of the order of the
reﬂection, while it depends on the reﬂection order in cor-
related substitutional and displacement disorder. This is
also illustrated in Fig. 10 which plots the particle size,
estimated through Eq. (7) for PbTiO3 and x = 0.30 and
x = 0.51 PZT compositions from 14 reﬂections. The ef-
fect of combined substitutional and displacement dis-
order is most evident in the x = 0.51 sample, seen as a
large number of satellite peaks (though there is no sim-
ple modulation of a periodic structure, we still use the
term satellite to distinguish the subsidiary minima peaks
due to the limited cluster size and disorder generated
peaks).
Correlated displacement and substitutional disorder
is most clearly seen in the h00 and 00l type reﬂections,
whereas the hhh reﬂections possess nearly symmetric
distribution of satellite peaks, see Fig. 12. The remarks
found in the case of periodical composition and dis-
placement disorder (see Table 1) are seen in Figs. 11 and
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
231
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 12 The contribution of the Pb-, O- and B-sublattices to the neutron scattering intensity of the 400, 004, and 111 reflections of
the x = 0.51 cluster. Logarithmic scale is used in order to show the weak satellite peaks more clearly.
Figure 13 Scattering intensities from an ellipsoid shaped PbTiO3
(red line) and a Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 (blue line) cluster. The ellipsoid
axes a, b and c were 24, 108 and 18 cell edges long, respectively
(Nx = 24, Ny = 108 and Nz = 18) and were parallel to the ax,
ay and az axes.
12: The intensities of the satellite peaks belonging to the
same pair centred at each Bragg reﬂection are not iden-
tical. The signatures are generic to PZT nanoclusters,
though the details depend on the cluster statistics.
Figure 14 180◦-domain walls (grey) in titanium-rich (left-hand
side, termed T-domains) and zirconium-rich PZT (right-hand side,
termed R-domains). Spontaneous polarization directions on the
left- and right-hand side and the domain wall normal are indicated
by PS,L, PS,R and n, respectively.
2.3 Ellipsoid shaped single domain clusters
Figure 13 shows the x-ray scattering proﬁles along three
directions for x = 0 and ≈0.52 clusters. Table 4 gives
the average lattice parameter and cluster size estimates,
obtained through Bragg and Scherrer equations, respec-
tively. The widths correspond to the values estimated
from the Scherrer equation, though they are systemat-
ically smaller than the cluster dimensions, being about
96% from the maximum ellipsoid dimension. The error
Table 4 Cluster metrics and the values as obtained through Bragg equation (at, bt and ct) and Scherrer equation (a, b and c). Values
(all in units of ˚A) are given in pairs, the first is the cluster (accurate) value, the second one is obtained through the Bragg/Scherrer
equation.
x
at
bt
ct
0
3.900000, 3.900300
3.900000, 3.900015
4.150000, 4.150105
0.514485
4.079813, 4.078121
4.074603, 4.074910
4.090201, 4.092251
a
b
c
0
93.600000, 89.503502
421.200000, 405.758631
74.700000, 71.396015
0.514485
97.700121, 93.289568
439.059234, 422.897821
73.485345, 70.458609
232
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
Figure 15 Selected x-ray scattering peaks
computed for (wavelength 1.540562 ˚A) two
T-domain wall positions (volume ratios
50/50 and 25/75) and a single domain
PbTiO3 cluster. The green curves give the
contribution due to the Pb-sublattice, red
give the oxygen sublattice contribution,
multiplied by a factor of 50 (300 and 030 re-
flections) or 10 (004 and 222 reflections), and
blue give the B-cation contribution multi-
plied by a factor of 5 (300 and 030 reflec-
tions), 10 (004 reflection) or 3 (222 reflec-
tion). Total intensities (which include also
Pb-O, Pb-B and alike terms) are given in the
left-hand column.
is very similar to the error obtained in the case of spheri-
cal clusters for which the Scherrer equation (7) holds. As
in the case of spherical clusters the Bragg equation val-
ues are rather close to the known average values. Partially
the error is due to the reasons discussed in the context of
spherical clusters. The impact of the width of the scatter-
ing intensity on the average lattice parameter estimation
is rather small.
2.4 Domains in spherical clusters
As an example of a complex defect system 180◦do-
main walls and domains in spherical clusters are mod-
elled. Figure 14 illustrates the structural model. The cases
treated below possess complex combination of displace-
ment disorder (when the boundary halves the particle,
left-hand side domain can be obtained from the right-
hand side domain by atomic displacements) and substi-
tutional disorder.
The cluster for simulations is constructed as ex-
plained in Section 2.1, except that the cation displace-
ments directions are reversed at different domains. In
each domain the cation positions are relaxed so that
the bond-valence sum criteria is fulﬁlled. In contrast to
many standard models, the two domains are not consid-
ered separately; instead the scattering intensity is com-
puted for the entire cluster. The purpose of the simula-
tion is to show that (i) domain structure has a signiﬁcant
impact on the scattering intensity, (ii) the method suits
for in-situ modelling (e.g., polarization reversal studies),
(iii) the impact of different elements can be isolated and
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
233
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
Figure 16 Selected x-ray scattering peaks
computed for (wavelength 1.540562 ˚A) two
R-domain wall positions (volume ratios
50/50 and 30/70) and a single domain
Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)TiO3
cluster.
The
green
curves give the contribution due to the Pb-
sublattice, red give the oxygen sublattice
contribution and blue give the B-cation
contribution. To show the features more
clearly, the intensities of the oxygen lattice
is multiplied by 10 and the and B-cation
lattice by a factor of 1 (300 and 030 re-
flections), 3 (111 reflection) or 10 (004
reflection). Total intensities (which include
also Pb-O, Pb-B and alike terms) are given
in the left-hand column.
(iv) certain reﬂections can no more be described by a
single asymmetric peak, even if they would originally
correspond to a single symmetric peak. Two domains
types, referred to as T- and R-domains, are considered.
In the T-domain the domain wall is perpendicular to
the ⟨100⟩direction and in the case of the R-domain the
wall is perpendicular to the ⟨111⟩direction. The pres-
ence of T- and R-domains is most evidently revealed
as a split of the hhh-type reﬂections. The split itself de-
pends on the domain wall position in the cluster, as is
seen from Figs. 15 and 16. In the case of R-domain and
111 reﬂection also the scattering intensity in the tail re-
gions of the Bragg peak is considerable, consistently with
the known strong diffuse scattering observed in many
Pb-perovskites. As reﬂection 111 indicates, see Fig. 16,
the strong diffuse scattering is due to the Pb-Pb scatter-
ing and is easily seen when the particle is divided into
domains.
The most signiﬁcant contribution to the split is from
Pb-ions, which are displaced from the corners to a cell
diagonal direction. The parallel epipeds are not identi-
cal and thus there is a variation in the Pb-displacement
directions within a domain. In T-domains the h00 type
reﬂections are left intact by the domain wall, whereas the
intensity depends strongly on the domain wall position
in the case of the 0k0 and 00l reﬂections. In R-domains all
reﬂections intensities and line shapes strongly depend
on the domain wall position.
Applications. By adjusting domain wall position and
orientation and cation displacement direction different
cases (e.g., 71◦domain walls) can be constructed in
234
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
a straightforward manner. Domain wall motion takes
place in polarization (P) switching. Also structural
changes occurring in the domain wall region can be im-
plemented into the model by constructing a domain wall
with a ﬁnite thickness. T-domain boundary addressed
above fulﬁls the electrical boundary condition, ∇· P =
0, so that the boundary is not charged. The mechan-
ical compatibility condition is satisﬁed as there is no
abrupt change in the average lattice parameters across
the boundary (i.e., the boundary is stress-free). Also
more complex cases, such as the formation of impu-
rity phase or cases not fulﬁlling the electrical and me-
chanical boundary conditions (head-to-head R-domain
is an example) can be constructed. A plausible appli-
cation would be a modelling of in-situ measurements
of domain walls in ferroelectric materials. Due to the
high brightness x-ray synchrotron radiation based exper-
imental techniques are evident methods for addressing
time-dependent phenomena. As an example, the non-
linear effects in the coupling of polarization with elas-
tic strain and the initial stage of polarization switching
were addressed in refs. [56, 57]. In these studies capac-
itors containing 35 nm thick epitaxial Pb(Zr0.20Ti0.80)O3
ferroelectric thin ﬁlms were studied by time-resolved
x-ray microdiffraction technique in which high-electric
ﬁeld up to several hundred MV/m pulses were synchro-
nized with the synchrotron x-ray pulses. Laboratory scale
measurements can also be used to address the in situ
structural changes in thin ﬁlms. An example is given in
ref. [58] which reports the changes in lattice parameter
(chemical expansivity) and its further use for quantifying
oxygen reduction reaction processes and vacancy con-
centration changes in La0.80Sr0.20CoO3−δ thin ﬁlms under
chemical and voltage stimuli.
An example of the use of an laboratory x-ray diffrac-
tometer to address time-dependent ferroelectric domain
reversal is given in ref. [59], where the changes in the vol-
ume fractions of the 90◦domains parallel to the electric
ﬁeld direction were calculated from the intensities of the
{002} diffraction peaks.
Also magnetic scattering can be treated in a manner
analogous to the nuclei scattering. In magnetic materials
the domain boundary region often have spatially large
extent (e.g., N´eel and Bloch walls) also in a direction per-
pendicular to the domain wall. In multiferroic materials
the ferroic properties are not necessarily well coupled,
and thus it is crucial to be able to isolate different con-
tributions to the scattering intensity. For instance, mag-
netization reversal may not be accompanied by apparent
changes in nuclei arrangements.
All above disorder cases can be combined to model
the often complex structures of multilayer thin ﬁlms.
Especially in structures formed from very thin layers (say,
of the order of few nanometers) the scattering intensity
should not be treated as originating from independent
layers. A better way is to model the entire structure and to
impose the required boundary conditions for interfaces.
3 Conclusions
Applications of x-ray and neutron scattering techniques
for analysing defects were reviewed. Focus was on
the common approaches applied for modelling defects.
A method for analysing scattering data collected on
nanoparticles was described with necessary compatibil-
ity conditions. The method is capable of isolating differ-
ent contributions to the scattering intensity, such as el-
ement speciﬁc scattering, microstrain in solid-solutions,
particle size and shape effects and domains: structural
disorder is not averaged away. Scattering measurements
provide information without destructive sample prepa-
ration. A case study on lead-zirconate-titanate nanopar-
ticles was given. Potential applications include nanopar-
ticles, disordered nanoparticles and in-situ studies of
structural changes in ferroic materials.
Acknowledgments. CSC - IT Center for Science Ltd. is acknowl-
edged for providing a computing environment.
A Appendix
A.1.1 Instrument specific corrections
Scattering geometry and the nature of the incident ra-
diation (for instance, x-rays or polarized or unpolarized
neutron beams) affects the observed scattering intensity.
The simplest correction is the diffraction geometry de-
pendent Lorentz factor L, a trigonometric factor due to
the fact that different reﬂections stay different times at
the reﬂection position. In the case of a constant angu-
lar speed and single crystal sample L is 1/ sin 2θ (see, e.g.
ref. [5]). For powders the prevailing measurement geom-
etry is the Bragg-Brentano, or θ/2θ geometry, in which
the sample is rotated at constant speed. If one assumes
that the incident beam probes large set of randomly ori-
ented crystals a further geometrical factor 1/ sin θ is re-
quired as only a fraction of the crystals are in a reﬂec-
tion position with respect to the detector. The Lorentz
factor is the same for x-rays and neutrons. Thus, the
neutron scattering intensities computed through Eq. (5)
were multiplied by a factor
1/(2 sin2 θ cos θ)
(A1)
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
235
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka: X-ray and neutron scattering on disordered nanosize clusters
In the case of x-rays one needs a further correction to
take the polarization of x-rays into account. Typically x-
rays emerging from a x-ray tube are unpolarized, and
after reﬂecting from the diffracting plane the component
of the electric ﬁeld parallel to the plane is not attenuated,
whereas the electric ﬁeld component perpendicular to
the diffracting plane is attenuated by a factor of cos2 θ, so
that the total intensity is reduced by a polarization factor
p = (1 + cos2 θ)/2. Monochromators affect the polariza-
tion factor and modiﬁed expressions for p are required:
p = (1 + K cos2 θ)/(1 + K ) when a monochromator for
an incident beam is used [5]. K is a constant typically
close to unity.
The effect of Lorentz and polarization corrections is
typically put together and expressed as the Lp factor,
which multiplies the scattering power or, in the case of
crystals, |Fhkl|2. In this study the x-ray scattering intensi-
ties were multiplied by a factor
(1 + cos2 2θ)/(sin2 θ cos θ)
(A2)
A.1.2 Line shapes in diffraction experiments
Instrument also affects the observed lineshape. When
the scattering power is computed by equation (5) as a
function of 2θ for a chosen direction of s, the cluster
size and shape dictates the linewidths and, if the cluster
is small, is almost entirely responsible for the broaden-
ing. In contrast, when the intensity for a speciﬁc reﬂec-
tion is computed as |Fhkl|2, a speciﬁc peak proﬁle must
be assumed. Typically, one needs to consider the sample
size and shape, possible defects causing symmetric and
asymmetric broadening, and the instrumental contribu-
tion as is done in conventional Rietveld reﬁnement. The
functions describing different contributions are convo-
luted, which is computationally heavy task. Correspond-
ingly, a large number of different types of proﬁle func-
tions have been introduced to model different cases.
Key words. nanoparticle, x-ray scattering, neutron scattering, de-
fect, domain.
References
[1]
A. Guinier, X-ray Diffraction in Crystals, Imperfect
Crystals, and Amorphous Bodies (Dover Publications,
Inc., New York, 1994).
[2]
E. Prince, (Ed.), International Tables for Crystallogra-
phy, Volume C: Mathematical, Physical and Chemical
Tables (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, 2002).
[3]
T. R. Welberry, Diffuse X-Ray Scattering and Models
of Disorder (Oxford University Press Inc., New York,
2010).
[4]
M. M. Woolfson, An Introduction to X-ray Crystal-
lography (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1997).
[5]
W. Massa, Crystal Structure Determination (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2000).
[6]
Th. Hahn (Ed.), International Tables for Crystallog-
raphy A: Space-group Symmetry (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 2005).
[7]
H. M. Rietveld, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2, 65 (1969).
[8]
R. A. Young, (Ed.), The Rietveld Method (Oxford Uni-
versity Press Inc., New York, 1996).
[9]
M. Birkholz, Thin Film Analysis by X-Ray Scattering
(Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,
2006).
[10]
P. W. Stephens, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 32, 281 (1999).
[11]
A. C. Larson and R. B. Von Dreele, General Structure
Analysis System (LANSCE MS-H805, Los Alamos Na-
tional Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, 2000).
[12]
M. D. Biegalski, D. D. Fong, J. A. Eastman, P. H. Fuoss,
S. K. Streiffer, T. Heeg, J. Schubert, W. Tian, C. T. Nel-
son, X. Q. Pan, M. E. Hawley, M. Bernhagen, P. Reiche,
R. Uecker, S. Trolier-McKinstry, and D. G. Schlom, J.
Appl. Phys. 104, 114109 (2008).
[13]
R. Phillips, Crystals, Defects and Microstructures:
Modeling Across Scales (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2001).
[14]
A. Kelly and K. M. Knowles, Crystallography and
Crystal Defects. Second Edition (John Wiley & Sons,
Malaysia, 2012).
[15]
K. W. Kolasinski, Surface Science: Foundations of
Catalysis and Nanoscience (Wiley, Chippenham,
2008).
[16]
H. L¨uth, Solid Surfaces, Interfaces and Thin Films
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001).
[17]
L. S. Zevin and G. Kimmel, Quantitative X-ray Diffrac-
tometry (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995).
[18]
B. A. Strukov and A. P. Levanyuk, Ferroelectric Phe-
nomena in Crystals: Physical Foundations (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1998).
[19]
N. W. Thomas, Acta Cryst. A66, 64 (2010).
[20]
M. T. Dove, Structure and Dynamics: An Atomic View
of Materials (Oxford University Press, Inc., New York,
2003).
[21]
B. Jaffe, W. R. Cook, and H. Jaffe, Piezoelectric Ceram-
ics (Academic Press, New York, 1971).
[22]
A basic search by a keyword “lead zirconate titanate”
in a topic ﬁeld and timespan from 2012 to 2014 gave
1114 records. When the time span was expanded to
cover years 1960–2014, the number of records was
6874, indicating that a large number of the research
records are recent.
[23]
M. E. Lines and A. M. Glass, Principles and Applica-
tions of Ferroelectric and Related Materials (Claren-
don Press, Oxford, 2001).
[24]
B. Kocsis, J. M. Perez-Mato, E. S. Tasci, G. de la Flor,
and M. I. Aroyo, J. Appl. Cryst. 47, 1165 (2014).
236
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.ann-phys.orgReview Article
Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 527, No. 3–4 (2015)
[25]
J. Frantti, J. Phys. Chem. B 112, 6521 (2008).
[26]
W. Cao and L. E. Cross, Phys. Rev. B 47, 4825 (1993).
[27]
B. Noheda, D. E. Cox, G. Shirane, J. A. Gonzalo, L. E.
Cross, and S.-E. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 2059 (1999).
[28]
H. Yokota, N. Zhang, A. E. Taylor, P. A. Thomas, and A.
M. Glazer, Phys. Rev. B 80, 104109 (2009).
[29]
J. Frantti, J. Lappalainen, S. Eriksson, V. Lantto, S.
Nishio, M. Kakihana, S. Ivanov, and H. Rund¨of, Jpn.
J. Appl. Phys., Part 1 39, 5697 (2000); J. Frantti, S.
Eriksson, S. Hull, S. Ivanov, V. Lantto, J. Lappalainen,
and M. Kakihana, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 24, 1141 (2004);
J. Frantti, S. Eriksson, S. Hull, V. Lantto, H. Rund¨of,
and M. Kakihana, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15, 6031
(2003); J. Frantti, Y. Fujioka, J. Zhang, S. Wang, S. C. Vo-
gel, R. M. Nieminen, A. M. Asiri, Y. Zhao, A. Y. Obaid,
and I. A. Mkhalid, J. Appl. Phys. 112, 014104 (2012).
[30]
A. M. Glazer, P. A. Thomas, K. Z. Baba-Kishi, G. K. H.
Pang, and C. W. Tai, Phys. Rev. B 70, 184123 (2004).
[31]
D. Vanderbilt and M. H. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B 63, 094108
(2001).
[32]
A. J. Bell and E. Furman, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1 42,
7418 (2003).
[33]
N. Lampis, P. Sciau, and A. Geddo Lehmann, J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 11, 3489 (1999).
[34]
V. Bonny, M. Bonin, P. Sciau, K. J. Schenk, and
G. Chapuis, Solid State Communications 102, 347
(1997).
[35]
H. Fu and R. E. Cohen, Nature 403, 281 (2000).
[36]
J. Frantti, Y. Fujioka, and R. M. Nieminen, J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 20, 472203 (2008).
[37]
N. Zhang, H. Yokota, A. M. Glazer, Z. Ren, D. A. Keen,
D. S. Keeble, P. A. Thomas, and Z.-G.- Ye, Nature Com-
munications 5, 6231 (2014).
[38]
D. Phelan, X. Long, Y. Xie, Z.-G. Ye, A. M. Glazer, H.
Yokota, P. A. Thomas, and P. M. Gehring, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 207601 (2010).
[39]
S. Gorfman, D. S. Keeble, A. M. Glazer, X. Long, Y. Xie,
Z.-G. Ye, S. Collins, and P. A. Thomas, Phys. Rev. B 84,
020102 (2011).
[40]
J. Frantti, V. Lantto, S. Nishio, and M. Kakihana, Phys.
Rev. 59, 12 (1999).
[41]
J. Frantti, Y. Fujioka, A. Puretzky, Y. Xie, Z.-G.
Ye, and A. M. Glazer, J. Appl. Phys. 113, 174104
(2013).
[42]
J. Frantti, Y. Fujioka, A. Puretzky, Y. Xie, Z.-G. Ye, C.
Parish, and A. M. Glazer, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 27,
025901 (2015).
[43]
D. L. Corker, A. M. Glazer, R. W. Whatmore, A. Stal-
lard, and F. Fauth, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 10, 6251
(1998).
[44]
J. Ricote, D. L. Corker, R. W. Whatmore, S. A. Impey,
A. M. Glazer, J. Dec, and K. Roleder, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 10, 1767 (1998).
[45]
C. Muller, J.-L. Baudour, V. Madigou, F. Bouree, J.-
M. Kiat, C. Favotto, and M. Roubin, Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 55, 8 (1999).
[46]
J. Frantti, S. Ivanov, S. Eriksson H. Rund¨of, V. Lantto,
J. Lappalainen, and M. Kakihana, Phys. Rev. B 66,
064108 (2002).
[47]
D. J. Goossens, Acc. Chem. Res. 46, 2597 (2013).
[48]
N. de Mathant, E. Hussont, S. G. Calvarint, J. R. Gavar-
ris, A. W. Hewat, and A. Morel, J. Phys.:Condens. Mat-
ter 3, 8159 (1991).
[49]
C. Malibert, B. Dkhil, J. M. Kiat, D. Durand, J. F. Brar,
and A. Spasojevic-de Bir, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 9,
7485 (1997).
[50]
B. Dkhil, J. M. Kiat, G. Calvarin, G. Baldinozzi, S. B.
Vakhrushev, and E. Suard, Phys. Rev. B 65, 024104
(2001).
[51]
M. Pa´sciak, T. R. Welberry, A. P. Heerdegen, V. Laguta,
T. Ostapchuk, S. Leonid, and J. Hlinka, Phase Transi-
tions, DOI: 10.1080/01411594.2014.981266.
[52]
J. Frantti and V. Lantto, Phys. Rev. B. 56, 221 (1997).
[53]
J. Frantti and Y. Fujioka, Method and system for
analysing data obtained using scattering measure-
ments from disordered material, WO2011/018554 -
EP2464962 B1 (2014).
[54]
J. Frantti, Y. Fujioka, J. Zhang, J. Zhu, S. C. Vogel, and
Y. Zhao, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 083901 (2014).
[55]
I. D. Brown, The Chemical Bond in Inorganic Chem-
istry: The Bond Valence Model (Oxford University
Press Inc., New York, 2009).
[56]
A. Grigoriev, R. Sichel, H. N. Lee, E. C. Landahl, B.
Adams, E. M. Dufresne, and P. G. Evans, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, 027604 (2008).
[57]
A. Grigoriev, R. Sichel, J. Y. Jo, S. Choudhury, L-Q.
Chen, H. N. Lee, E. C. Landahl, B. Adams, E. M.
Dufresne, and P. G. Evans, Phys. Rev. B 80, 014110
(2009).
[58]
M. D. Biegalski, E. Crumlin, A. Belianinov, E. Mutoro,
Y. Shao-Horn, and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104,
161910 (2014).
[59]
A. Pramanick and J. L. Jones, IEEE Transactions on Ul-
trasonics, Ferroelec. Freq. Cont. 56, 1546 (2009).
C⃝2015 by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
237
www.ann-phys.org