A fretting crack initiation prediction taking into account the surface
roughness and the crack nucleation process volume
H. Proudhona,b, S. Fouvrya,*, J.-Y. Bufﬁe`reb
aLaboratoire de Tribologie et de dynamique des syste`mes, UMR 5513, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, 36 Avenue Guy de Collongue, 69134 Ecully Cedex, France
bGroupe d’Etude de Me´tallurgie et de Physique des Mate´riaux, UMR 5510, Insa de Lyon, 20 avenue Albert Einstein, 69621 Villeurbanne Cedex, France
Received 14 October 2003; received in revised form 2 September 2004; accepted 2 September 2004
Abstract
This paper presents an experimental study of the fretting crack nucleation threshold, expressed in terms of loading conditions, with a
cylinder/plane contact. The studied material is a damage tolerant aluminium alloy widely used in the aerospace application. Since in
industrial problems, the surface quality is often variable, the impact of a unidirectional roughness is investigated via varying the roughness of
the counter body in the fretting experiments. As expected, experimental results show a large effect of the contact roughness on the crack
nucleation conditions. Rationalisation of the crack nucleation boundary independently of the studied roughnesses was successfully obtained
by introducing the concept of effective contact area. This does show that the fretting crack nucleation of the studied material can be efﬁciently
described by the local effective loadings inside the contact. Analytical prediction of the crack nucleation is presented with the Smith–
Watson–Topper (SWT) parameter and size effect is also studied and discussed.
q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
pacs: 62.20.Mk; 62.20.Qp
Keywords: Fretting; Crack initiation; Aluminium alloy; Roughness; SWT fatigue criterion; Size effect
1. Introduction
Weight saving is still a topical issue in aerospace
applications. Because of their low densities, aluminium
alloys are widely used in air plane structures, in spite of
quite bad fatigue and tribological properties. As noted by
many authors [1,2], a very important example of application
is riveted lap joints structures, where contact fretting stress,
due to vibrations during the ﬂight, can initiate cracks at the
hole edge which may propagate due to the overall structure
fatigue stress. In the worst case, propagation will lead to
failure. Authors [2,3] also report partial slip in rivet
structures. This shows the importance of investigating
fretting crack initiation boundary in partial slip conditions
of concerned material. In addition, in industrial application,
where variable surface qualities can be found, one major
issue is the impact of surface roughness on the crack
nucleation process. Coupling experiments and modelling
this paper focuses on this topic in order to predict the
cracking risk on a 2024T351 aluminium alloy under fretting
loading and taking into account the roughness impact. To
evaluate the roughness effect on a simple fretting test, a
cylinder/plane conﬁguration with three different fretting
pads in terms of roughness, was used. After a brief
description of fretting test, material studied and surface
roughness morphologies, the crack nucleation boundary at
5!104 fretting cycles under partial slip condition is deﬁned
for the smooth contact case. Two unidirectional surface
roughnesses are successively analysed and the correspond-
ing crack nucleation boundary is determined. Introducing
the concept of effective contact area, the different
experimental results are rationalised through the introduc-
tion of a crack nucleation master curve. Finally, applying
the SWT multiaxial fatigue criterion, prediction of the crack
nucleation is intended taking into account the size effect.
0142-1123/$ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2004.09.001
International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
www.elsevier.com/locate/ijfatigue
* Corresponding author. Tel.: C33 472 186 562; fax: C33 478 433 383.
E-mail address: siegfried.fouvry@ec-lyon.fr (S. Fouvry).2. Experimental work
Fretting is deﬁned as a small oscillatory movement
between two bodies in contact which induce a relative
displacement between the two surfaces Considered as a
plague for modern industries, it is a very complex problem
involving many aspects as tribology, contact fatigue
mechanics and material science. To reproduce such
phenomena, different fretting test devices have been
developed [4,5].
2.1. Material and specimens description
2024T351 is an aluminium copper magnesium alloy
which has been solution heat treated, control stretched
and naturally aged. Chemical composition and mechan-
ical properties are listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively,
Rp0.2% denotes the classical yield stress deﬁned at 0.2%
of strain; E the Young’s modulus, n denotes Poisson’s
ration and sd the fatigue limit. Specimens were extracted
from a laminar plate
of 25 mm thick supplied by
Pechiney Industries. After machining, the surface in
contact were carefully polished until mirror state (Ra
around 0.05 mm). Displacement direction of the fretting
tests is parallel to the L direction of the material along
which grains are elongated (see Fig. 1). Grain size in the
T direction was determined to be 150 mm by Electron
Back Scattered Diffraction (EBSD) mapping, using a line
intercept measurement method.
2.2. Fretting experiment
The experimental setup used in this study is based on a
fretting device rigidly mounted to a servo hydraulic test
machine (see Fig. 2). The counter body is made of 7075T6
aluminium alloy; the cylinder radius is 49 mm and the
cylinder length L is 4.4 mm. In cylinder plane conﬁguration,
it is helpful to deﬁne normalised loads P and Q with respect
to the contact length (Eq. (1)), which is perpendicular
to the sliding direction. The linear normal load range is
100–1000 N/mm, equivalent to a nominal maximum
hertzian pressure from 220 to 700 MPa
P Z FN
L
and Q Z FT
L
(1)
Once specimen is ﬁxed and carefully aligned with the
counter body, fretting solicitation is applied during 5!104
cycles by monitoring the normal load imposed to the
surfaces (P) and the displacement amplitude (d) or the
tangential load amplitude induced by the contact (Q). For
the oscillatory parameters the stared versions (d*Q*) denote
their amplitude. After the test, an optical micrograph of the
fretting scar is recorded and a cross-section is made by
cutting the specimen in the middle of the contact zone and
polishing this surface. Crack initiation is investigated
through optical micrography and images are recorded if
any damage is visible. The crack angle with respect to the
surface, and then crack depth below the surface are
measured. Such a cross-section of a fretting crack observed
by optical micrography is presented in Fig. 3.
2.3. Surface quality
Relatively, few literature can be found on the effect of
roughness in fretting damage. Although a detrimental effect
of the roughness is expected, some authors have reported
Table 1
Chemical composition of Al 2024T351 (wt%)
%Cu
%Mg
%Mn
%Fe
%Si
%Cr
%Ti
4.4
1.45
0.62
0.20
0.15
0.01
0.03
Table 2
A summary of the mechanical properties of the 2024T351 alloy used for
fretting tests
Rp0.2% (MPa)
E (GPa)
n
sd (MPa)
325
72.4
0.33
140
Fig. 1. Al 2024T351 microstructure of the sample surface. Optical
micrograph, after a Keller reactive attack, showing elongated grain
structure in the rolling direction. Intermetallics particles appear in dark.
Fig. 2. Detail of fretting test device.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
570a great beneﬁt in term of lifetime can be obtain by a special
laser surface texturing [6]. In order to study the roughness
effect on the fretting crack nucleation conditions, three
different cylinders named R1, R2, R3 with increasing
roughness, are used. Each counter body is obtained by lathe
machining so that roughness is assumed unidimensional. R3
is machined with relatively high speed advance of the tool,
R2 is obtained with a lower one and R1 is polished on the
machine after as ﬁne as possible machining. Fig. 4 presents
the three proﬁles of the fretting pads and one of a specimen
for comparison. Respective roughnesses are measured on a
tactile proﬁlometer and the corresponding results are
gathered in Table 3.
3. Tribology analysis
3.1. Fretting regime analysis and material response maps
Two essential sliding conditions can be deﬁned: Partial
slip regime (PSR) characterised by a closed elliptical
fretting loop, with a composite contact of a sliding and a
sticking zone; and Gross slip regime (GSR) identiﬁed by a
quadratic dissipative fretting loop, with full sliding
occurring over the entire contact zone [7]. The transition
between one regime to another deﬁnes the Mixed fretting
regime (MFR) Identiﬁcation of this regimes in carried out
by plotting a Running Condition Fretting Map (RCFM).
Waterhouse [8] ﬁrst highlighted a correlation between the
sliding regime and fretting damage. The main fretting
damages can be rationalised in a Material Response Fretting
Map (MRFM) involving non-degradation, cracking, particle
detachment in a map with normal load versus relative
displacement. The fretting description proposed by Vincent
et al. [9] is based on these two sets of fretting maps (see
Fig. 5). When the relative displacement of the surface is
small, partial slip prevail and induce crack initiation,
although at higher values of the displacement, gross slip
settles and impose wear of the surface. Since in our case,
partial slip is assumed, very small displacement amplitudes
have been maintained to study the crack initiation.
3.2. Experimental fretting regimes determination
To determine the fretting regimes, variable displacement
method [10], has been applied for different values of the
normal load In each test, the normal load is kept constant.
The relative displacement start to a very low value,
imposing partial slip (with Q*!mtP). When stabilised
conditions are reached, d* is increased and maintained
constant until new stabilisation is reach. d* is increased this
way, step by step, until the contact has overcome the sliding
transition conditions (i.e. Q*ZmtP). Precise value of the
transition is then calculated by computing the value of
Fig. 3. Optical micrograph of the cross-section below the surface.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the three fretting pads roughness proﬁles.
Table 3
Mean and maximal roughness of cylinders and specimens
R1
R2
R3
Samples
Ra (mm)
0.11
0.60
0.75
0.04–0.08
Rt (mm)
1.05
3.10
3.15
0.082
Fig. 5. Running condition fretting map which combines the fretting regime
analysis (RCFM) with the material response (MRFM).
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
571the energy sliding criterion AZEd/Et; with Ed the dissipated
energy of the corresponding cycle and Et the total energy
[11,12]. In the cylinder/plane conﬁguration, it has been
shown that the sliding transition is associated to a
discontinuity of ratio A (see Fig. 6). Fig. 7 present the
sliding transition obtained with the variable displacement
method, for a cylinder/plane contact of Al2024T351 versus
Al7075T6. In this ﬁgure, results are presented versus the
relative displacement amplitude d*. However, it does not
appear as the more convenient representation when different
series of results are compared. Indeed, the value of d*
depends on the fretting setup compliance [12]. Since we will
use three different fretting pads and different contact
compliances, the displacement amplitude is adequately
substituted by the linear tangential force amplitude Q*
(N/mm). Note that the tangential force is not affected by the
apparatus compliance. In the next, except if speciﬁed,
results will be presented using the tangential force.
3.3. Coefﬁcient of friction in partial slip
Under partial slip conditions, slip takes place in two
symmetrical regions aOjxjRc which surround a central
stick zone jxj!c. In this central zone, from Coulomb’s law
we have q(x)%mt!p(x). Because of the stick zone, the
friction coefﬁcient obtained at the sliding transition cannot
not used. Instead, the friction coefﬁcient in partial slip
regime mPS can be determined by the investigation of the
scars, after the fretting tests. From Mindlin cited by Jonhson
[13] we have:
c Z a 1 K
Q
mPS !P

1=2
(2)
From which:
mPS Z
1
1 K
c
a
 2 !Q
P
(3)
From examination of fretting scars, the contact width 2a
and the stick zone width 2c (deﬁned in Fig. 8) are measured
for a large range of displacement values and the friction
coefﬁcient in partial slip regime is calculated in each case.
This was done for a constant normal force FNZ1400 N
(PZ318 N/mm) and result is assumed to be true wathever
the value of P is for the investigated experimental
conditions. Fig. 9 summarise the results obtained by this
Fig. 6. Illustration of variable displacement method (see the text for details),
FnZ750 N. The ratio Q*/P (left scale) increases until stabilised gross slip
condition is reach. The energy ratio A is computed and exhibits a
discontinuity at the transition.
Fig. 7. Experimental determination of the sliding transition, cylinder/plane
contact, 2024T351 vs 7075T6, RZ49 mm.
Fig. 8. Experimental scar after a fretting test, FnZ1400 N and FtZ500 N.
Deﬁnition of stick and slip zones width.
Fig. 9. Determination of the friction law in partial slip regime, FNZ1400 N.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
572methodology.
The
evolution
toward
gross
slip
as
displacement (and so tangential force) increase is well
observed. Calculations of the friction coefﬁcient in partial
slip regime with Eq. (3) show clearly a constant evolution,
very close to the value at the transition. Then we can
postulate that the coefﬁcient of friction under studied partial
slip conditions is identical to the value deﬁned at the
transition
mPSðk; Q; PÞ Z mt y1:1
(4)
4. Cracking analysis in partial slip conditions
The experimental objective in this part is to determine as
ﬁnely as possible for each studied normal force, the critical
tangential force associated to the crack initiation after
5!104 cycles under stabilised partial slip conditions
4.1. Methodology
For each normal load, kept constant during a test, several
fretting tests were carried out as detailed in Section 2.2,
maintaining a constant tangential force (Q*) by monitoring
the displacement amplitude (d*). The critical value ðQ
c Þ is
precisely determined thanks to cross section observations of
specimens cut after fretting solicitation. Cracking is
assessed by optical inspection, the smallest observable
crack being around 5 mm long. To bracket the crack
nucleation threshold, dichotomy is applied to select the
values of Q* [11]. About 10 test are required to reach a 5 N
accuracy in the determination of Q
c . Measurement of the
crack lengths allows to extrapolate Q
c even if dispersion
can sometimes disturb the method. This methodology is
illustrated in Fig. 10.
4.2. Results with a smooth contact
The described methodology is applied with R1 counter
body for ﬁve normal forces and crack nucleation boundary is
determined (Fig. 11). In addition, Several other conclusions
can be derived from experimental observations. First of all,
the crack nucleation is always located near the trailing edge
of the contact, which is in agreement with former fretting
studies in partial slip regimes. When crack initiation is
detected, the crack angle is measured and is found to be lower
than 358 for all the loading conditions investigated. Referring
to the work of Lamacq [14] and Dubourg and Lamacq [15],
cracks seems to growth under mode II by maximal shear
amplitude. Fig. 11 shows that the threshold tangential load is
found independent of the normal force, giving:
Q
c ðPÞ Z Q
c y240 N=mm
(5)
5. Roughness impact
In this section, results with rough surfaces are presented
and compared. As expected, signiﬁcant gaps are observed
between each crack nucleation boundary. The effective
contact area concept is introduced in order to account for the
roughness. Finally, a new representation is introduced
which rationalises the different crack boundaries obtained
for different roughnesses.
5.1. Results with rough contacts
Mean and total values of fretting pads roughness were
presented in Table 3. The same methods as used in
paragraph 3.2, for determining the sliding transition and in
paragraph 4.2 for establishing the crack nucleation
boundary, were used with the fretting pads of roughness R2
and R3. The corresponding results are shown in Figs. 12
and 13. In Fig. 12, it can be seen that the sliding transition
does not depends on the roughness value. This could be
Fig. 10. Schematics of the crack nucleation threshold determination:
(a) fretting test conditions; (b) results in terms of crack length.
Fig. 11. Experimental fretting crack nucleation boundary, cylinder/plane
smooth contact (RZ49 mm).
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
573expected since gross slip condition is imposed at the
transition, which induce wear in the contact. Roughness is
then blurred in a few cycles; and the contact interface tends to
a unique structure.
On the contrary, the crack initiation, under stabilised
partial slip condition, strongly depends on the surface
roughness (Fig. 13). As expected, a higher roughness leads
to a lower tangential threshold load. Fig. 13 also shows a
slope in the experimental boundaries obtained with R2 and
R3. This inﬂuence of the normal force on the tangential
threshold load was not observed with R1.
Those differences in tangential load threshold can be
explained in considering intrinsic contact parameters.
Indeed, the observation of fretting scars (Fig. 14), clearly
shows that for identical loading conditions, the fretting pad
surface in contact varies with the surface roughness. This
implies different loading conditions inside the contact,
depending on the area effectively involved in the contact.
5.2. Deﬁnition of the effective contact area
First developed by Greenwood [16], the effective contact
area Seff can be simpliﬁed in our case. Considering
the polished surfaces of the specimens and the unidimen-
sional fretting pad roughness, Seff is easily deﬁned as the sum
of the micro-rectangles of the pad indentation. This deﬁnition
can be one more time simpliﬁed by 2a!Leff where Leff is the
sum of the micro-length of indentation on the medium line
of the contact (Fig. 15). This rather simplistic deﬁnition is
Fig. 12. Comparison of sliding transitions obtained with smooth and rough
cylinder.
Fig. 13. Experimental determination of crack nucleation boundaries with
three different roughness.
Fig. 14. Examples of optical micrography of specimen surfaces after a
fretting test. (a) pad R1, FNZ1400 N and FTZ500 N, (b) pad R2, FNZ
800 N and FTZ400 N, (c) pad R3, FNZ600 N and FTZ450 N.
Fig. 15. Deﬁnition of the effective contact area Seff (see the text for details).
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
574only valid for well-aligned contact. Next step is to quantify
the inﬂuence of FN and FT on Leff. Effective contact lengths
were measured from optical images of fretting scars after the
tests. Results clearly show a negligible inﬂuence of
tangential load so that Leff appears mainly monitored by the
normal load. A linear dependence of Leff with FN is observed;
the quasi horizontal curve obtained for R1 shows that SeffZS
in the investigated loading range (Fig. 16).
5.3. Uniﬁcation of the fretting crack nucleation boundary
Two new loading parameters Peff and Qeff, respectively,
the effective normal load and the effective tangential load
are introduced:
Peff Z FN
Leff
and Qeff Z FT
Leff
(6)
Fig. 16 gives the evolution of Leff with FN. Assuming a
negligible impact of the tangential force on Leff, the values
of Peff and Qeff can be computed. All the fretting tests
deﬁning the three nucleation boundaries can then be plotted
in terms of the intrinsic contact loading parameters Peff and
Qeff. The corresponding representation is presented in
Fig. 17. In this ﬁgure, compared to Fig. 13, the crack
nucleation boundary under partial slip conditions appears
independent of the roughness value (for the experimental
conditions investigated). Accessing intrinsic contact loading
parameter was successful in correlating the three exper-
imental boundaries. One point further reinforce this
correlation: in Fig. 13, the slope with R2 is larger
than with R3 even if the roughness is lower. Fig. 16
shows that the slope in the Leff evolution with FN is larger
for R2 than for R3. This result might seem incoherent with
the fact that zero slope is expected for a perfectly smooth
contact. However, it could be explained by a different
response of roughness to indentation induced by the quite
different shapes of the roughness proﬁles shown in Fig. 4.
This outlines the difﬁculty to rationalise a surface
morphology by only considering the two parameters Ra
and Rt. In any case, the larger slope observed for the Leff_
R2ðFNÞ curve perfectly accounts for the good correlation
observed in Fig. 17 and highlights the physical reliability of
the approach.
To summarise Fig. 17, it is shown here that the crack
initiation of the 2024 alloy studied depends on the real local
stress state (Peff,Qeff), which cannot be calculated without
considering the real contact length Leff in case of a rough
contact. It is also shown here that considering the effective
loading parameters have removed the effect of P observed
with the two rough contacts in Fig. 13. This effect may thus
be related to the material response versus the indentation of
the asperities of the counter body.
6. Fretting crack initiation prediction
with SWT parameter
To predict the crack nucleation risk and formalise the
previous experiments, the SWT multiaxial fatigue criterion
is implemented and combined with a Mindlin description of
the cylinder/plane contact conﬁguration. Explicit formu-
lation will provide a physical justiﬁcation to a non
dependence of the crack initiation boundary with respect
to the normal load. Size effect is also introduced and
implemented. It should be noted that alternative approaches
like combining classical fracture mechanics and notch
fatigue can also be used to tackle this problem. Such an
approach was recently carried out by Ciavarella [17].
6.1. Theoretical background
The SWT critical plane approach was ﬁrst used to tackle
fretting problems by Szolwinski and Farris [1]. They used
a fatigue approach developed by Smith et al. [18] which was
developed to account for a mean stress or strain effect in
classical fatigue. According to the Szolwinski and Farris
approach, the crack initiation in fretting occurs on the plane
Fig. 16. Experimental determination of Leff evolution with normal force
(pad length: LZ4.4 mm).
Fig. 17. Experimental fretting crack nucleation boundaries, with various
pad roughness, plotted in Peff/Qeff representation.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
575where the product of the normal strain amplitude ea, and the
maximum normal stress smax is maximum. The SWT
parameter G can then be expressed as:
G Z smax !ea Z ðs0
fÞ2
E
ð2NÞ2b0 Cs0
fe0
fð2NÞb0Cc0
(7)
where s0
f is the fatigue strength coefﬁcient, b0 is the fatigue
strain exponent, e0
f is the fatigue ductility coefﬁcient, c0 is the
fatigue ductility exponent and N the number of reversal to
failure. These constants are also given by Szolwinski et al.
[19] and listed in Table 4.
To normalise the crack nucleation risk, the following
scalar parameter dSWT can be introduced:
dSWT Z
maxðsmax !eaÞ
ðs0
fÞ2
E ð2NÞ2b0 Cs0
fe0
fð2NÞb0Cc0
(8)
If dSWT is greater than or equal to 1, cracking is likely to
occur. If dSWT is less than 1, there is no risk of cracking. By
expressing analytically smax and ea, a literal expression of
the cracking risk dSWT can be obtained. Fouvry et al. [12]
and Fridrici [20] showed that the SWT multiaxial fatigue
criteria application on fretting contact gives a maximum
crack initiation risk a the trailing edge of the contact. This is
in agreement with our experimental observations. We can
therefore express the surface stresses at the contact border in
partial slip with Mindlin theory. Assuming an elastic plane
strain 2D state, we use the general equation [21]
sijðx; yÞ Z p0
sn
ij
x
a ; y
a


p0


Cmp0
st
ij
x
a ; y
a


mp0


Kmp0
c
a
st
ij
x
c ; y
c


mp0


(9)
where sn
ij and st
ij denotes stresses in a cylinder plane contact
submitted to normal load and tangential load, respectively.
Note that the subscript ij can denote any spatial direction.
At the trailing edge of the contact (at xZa and yZ0)
we have
sn
xxð1; 0Þ Z 0
sn
yyð1; 0Þ Z 0
sn
zzð1; 0Þ Z 0
sn
xyð1; 0Þ Z 0
;
st
xxð1; 0Þ Z 2mp0
st
yyð1; 0Þ Z 0
st
zzð1; 0Þ Z 2nmp0
st
xyð1; 0Þ Z 0
and
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
st
xx
a
c ; 0
	

Z 2mp0
a
c K2mp0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a
c
	 
2
K1
r
st
yy
a
c ; 0
	

Z 0
st
zz
a
c ; 0
	

Z n! st
xx
a
c ; 0
	

st
xy
a
c ; 0
	

Z 0
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
which gives:
sxxða; 0Þ Z 2mp0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 K c
a
	 
2
r
(10)
This equation may be written in a more convenient form
by combining it with (2) to give:
sxxða; 0Þ Z 2mp0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Q
mPSP
s
(11)
In cylinder/plane conﬁguration we have
p0 Z
PE
pR

1=2
and experimental analysis (see Section 3.3) showed that
mPSZmZ1.1. Combining these elements we get:
sxxða; 0Þ Z 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
mEQ
pR
r
(12)
The stress state at the trailing edge of the contact can be
considered as quasi uniaxial. From Hook’s law we deduce at
point (a,0):
exx Z 1
E ½ð1 Kn2Þsxx Knð1 CnÞszz
Z 1
E ½ð1 Kn2Þ Kn2ð1 CnÞsxx
(13)
On the loading path of a fretting cycle, we have at point
(a,0):
ea Z DE
2 Z exx KðKexxÞ
2
Z exx
(14)
The SWT parameter is ﬁnally simpliﬁed to the following
expression:
G Z 1 K2n2 Kn3
E
s2
xx
(15)
We consider the critical crack initiation limit (dSWTZ1)
so that the equivalent critical crack tensile stress, with
respect to SWT criterion, is expressed as:
s2 Q
xx c
Z ðs0
fÞ2ð2NÞ2b0 Cs0
f30
fð2NÞb0Cc0
1 K2n2 Kn3
(16)
Finally, from Eq. (12) we determine a critical linear
tangential force amplitude associated to the crack initiation
condition:
Q
c Z pR
4mE
ðs0
fÞ2ð2NÞ2b0 Cs0
fe0
fð2NÞb0Cc0
1 K2n2 Kn3
(17)
Table 4
SWT parameters for Al 2024T351 from [19]
sf (MPa)
b0
e0
f
c0
714
K0.078
0.166
K0.538
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
576The critical linear tangential force amplitude is pro-
portional to the cylinder radius, a function of the elastic and
fatigue properties of the material and inversely proportional
to the friction coefﬁcient. It must be pointed out that Q
c
does not depend on the normal force which account for the
observed negligible impact of the pressure ﬁeld on crack
nucleation. Performing a numerical application leads to
Q
c Z106 N=mm, value to be compared with the exper-
imental threshold of 240 N/mm. This difference could be
related to the large stress/strain gradients which exists in and
below the contact region.
Although this approach gives a theoretical justiﬁcation of
the normal load non dependance, it cannot predict the exact
threshold tangential load. Indeed, fretting crack initiation
behaviour may also depend on the severity of the
stress/strain gradients, and not only on the maximum
values. First introduced by Fouvry et al. [12,22], the crack
nucleation process volume was successively adapted by
Araujo and Nowell [23] and more recently used by Naboulsi
and Mall [24]. In this approach, the computation of a
representative SWT critical plane parameter must be
conducted from an averaged stress strain state, deﬁned
over an intrinsic processing material volume. Hence, the
stress gradient effect is indirectly controlled through the
averaging process.
6.2. Crack nucleation process volume approach
To compute the SWT parameter using the process
volume approach, a cross-section is discretised and partial
slip stresses and strains corresponding to the experimental
conditions, are computed from Mindlin solutions. Process
volume averaging is then applied considering a radial shape
volume as shown in Fig. 18. The SWT crack initiation
parameter is then computed from these averaged values
which gives a mean SWT value on the process volume. As
discussed in [24], SWT could be computed on each point,
the averaging procedure occurring thereafter; but the result
would not be very different and the ﬁrst method, which is
faster, has more physical meaning. From these compu-
tations, the critical locations where cracking risk is
maximum, is located at the contact surface in the vicinity
of the trailing edge. This matches the experimental
observations seen in Section 4. However if the crack
location at the trailing edge is well predicted, the SWT
parameter does not predict the observed crack initiation
angle (%358). All the values are closed to 908, perpendicu-
lar to the maximum principal stress. Indeed, mainly
dependent on the tensile stress and strain state, the SWT
parameter is unable to describe the shear mechanisms which
presently control the crack nucleation process. The process
volume has been identiﬁed for a linear effective force of
380 N/mm. Fig. 19 displays the surface distribution of the
cracking risk dSWT deﬁned in Eq. (8), for different averaging
length scale values. Experimental correlation with the crack
nucleation boundary is obtained for a rZ80 mm process
volume radius. This value match very well the mean grain
size radius of 75 mm, and consequently conﬁrms a
correlation between the mechanical crack nucleation
process volume and the microstructure.
With the process volume radius ﬁxed, by varying normal
load in the computation analysis, one can draw the analytic
crack initiation boundary predicted with SWT parameter.
This is compared to the experimental boundary in Fig. 20
and plot in the effective loads representation.
6.3. Discussion
Obviously, Fig. 20 conﬁrms that SWT computations
with a rZ80 mm process volume radius allows to predict
the studied 240 N/mm linear normal loading. Although a
weak inﬂuence of the normal load is observed, it is
nevertheless deduced that the application of a singular
process volume radius is ineffective to quantify the
pressure impact. Indeed, in the SWT formulation, pressure
Fig. 19. Application of the averaging method in calculation of the cracking
risk at surface with the SWT parameter.
Fig. 18. Schematic representation of the radial shape process volume
averaging.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
577effect have tendency to reduce the cracking risk which is
based on tensile stress, although the contrary is observed
experimentally. Thus, the physical meaning of the SWT
parameter to predict the 2024T351 fretting crack initiation
appears discutable. Other criteria, more representative of
the physical behaviour of the studied alloy, should be
studied involving elasto-plastic analyses of the stress/strain
loading path.
6.4. Identiﬁcation of a safe crack nucleation process volume
The results presented above show that analytical
calculations coupled with the process volume approach
and the SWT criterion are limited for predicting the
experimental crack nucleation boundary However, due to
the simplicity of its formulation, it is widely employed in
industrial component conception. An alternative method to
reach a safe prediction for crack initiation in contact
submitted to fretting loading, is presently introduced.
First, the contact pressure range must be deﬁned. Then
the process volume is evaluated for both Pmin and Pmax.
Assuming a monotonous evolution between Pmin and Pmax,
the safe crack nucleation process volume rs is deﬁned as:
rs Z Min½rðPmaxÞ; rðPminÞ
(18)
In the present case, a positive slope with the pressure
increase has been identiﬁed. Therefore, we can directly
assume that the safe crack nucleation process volume
correspond to the process volume deﬁned for Pmax, the
maximum pressure loading. Setting Pmax to 1000 N/mm
leads to a critical value of rZ70 mm which can be used
to deﬁne the safety domain (see Fig. 21). It is important
to mention that the obtained process volume is very close
to the value previously deﬁned for the minimal pressure.
Again, it conﬁrms the stability of the approach and
support the idea of a reliable grain size averaging
approach.
7. Conclusion
Fretting crack initiation under partial slip conditions is
investigated through an experimental approach and the
effect of roughness is studied quantitatively. Aluminium
alloys contact, under cylinder/plane conﬁguration is studied
in order to tackle crack initiation in riveted assemblies.
Three fretting pads are used with tree different surface
qualities, with a unidimensional roughness morphology.
First, the running condition fretting map is determined
and the friction law is quantiﬁed. The friction coefﬁcient in
partial slip is demonstrated to be equal to the friction
coefﬁcient at the transition mtZ1.1. The sliding transition
appears to be independent of the roughness value, which
could be explained by a rapid blurring of the incipient
surface roughness under gross slip conditions.
Further work has been undertaken to determine the
experimental crack nucleation boundaries with respect to
the surface roughness. Results have shown that a critical
tangential load could be found with a smooth contact,
although a weak pressure effect is observed for the two
rough contacts. As expected, crack initiation appears very
sensitive to the surface quality, a higher roughness leading
to a lower value of the tangential force needed for crack
initiation. A contact effective area formulation is introduced
in order to access the intrinsic contact loading parameters.
Linear normal and tangential effective loads Peff and Qeff are
computed and a new representation is drawn to describe the
crack nucleation boundaries. This is successfully applied to
correlate experimental results and various crack nucleation
boundaries are uniﬁed independently of the surface quality
leading to Q
effcZ240 N=mm.
An analytical justiﬁcation of the weak dependence of Q
c
to the normal load for a smooth contact has been conducted.
SWT criterion has been formulated in order to predict the
crack nucleation threshold. The non-inﬂuence of the normal
load on crack nucleation threshold is justiﬁed although
Fig. 20. Comparison between experimental and predicted crack nucleation
boundary with a 80 mm size effect. Fretting contact: Al2024T351 plane
versus Al7075T6 cylinder pad (RZ49 mm).
Fig. 21. Deﬁnition of the safety domain predicted by analytical
computations of SWT parameter with the safe crack nucleation process
volume rs.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
578the numerical application appears to be on the safe side. A
radial process volume approach is then introduced to take
into account the severe stress/strain gradient in the contact.
A global correlation is found with the experimental results
with a process volume diameter which match the mean grain
radius of 75 mm and thus, this effect could be correlated to a
stress/strain microstructure accommodation. In spite of this,
the pressure effect on the crack nucleation boundary, is not
in agreement with experimental results. To avoid a large
underestimation of the cracking risk, a safe crack nucleation
process volume identiﬁcation approach is introduced. It
consists in deﬁning the smallest volume through the
investigated pressure and contact size ranges.
However, some critical aspects like the pressure loading
impact or the incipient crack orientation suggests that other
fatigue approaches must be considered and elasto-plastic
stress/strain analysis are required.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Rhone Alpes Material
Federation, Pechiney and EADS Industries.
References
[1] Szolwinski M, Farris T. Mechanics of fretting fatigue crack formation.
Wear 1996;198:93–107.
[2] Harish G, Szolwinski M, Farris T. Finite element modeling of rivet
installation and riveted joints for the prediction of fretting crack
nucleation. In: First joint DoD/FAA/NASA conference on aging
aircraft, Ogden, UT, 1997.
[3] Kapsa P, Chateauminois A, Vincent L. Tribologie et endommagement
dans les assemblages. In: Colloque National MECAMAT, Aussois,
2003.
[4] Nowell D, Hills D. Crack initiation in fretting fatigue. Wear 1990;136:
329–43.
[5] Blanchard P, Colombier C, Pellerin V. Material effect in fretting wear.
Metall Trans 1991;1535–44.
[6] Volchok A, Halperin G, Etsion I. The effect of surface regular
microtopography on fretting fatigue life. Wear 2002;253(3–4):509–15.
[7] Fouvry S, Kapsa P, Vincent L. In: Mutoh Y, Kinyon SE, Hoeppner
DW, editors. A global methodology to quantify fretting damages,
ASTM STP 1425. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International.
[8] Waterhouse R. Fretting fatigue. Barking: Applied Science; 1981.
[9] Vincent L, Berthier Y, Godet M. Testing methods in fretting fatigue: a
critical appraisal, ASTM STP 1159 on standardization of frettin
fatigue test methods and equipment. West Conshocken, PA: American
Society for Testing and Materials; 1992 p. 33–48.
[10] Voisin J. Me´thodologie pour l’e´tude de l’endommagement d’un
contact tube-bille, PhD Thesis, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, 1992.
[11] Fouvry S, Kapsa P, Vincent L. Quantiﬁcation of fretting damage.
Wear 1996;200:186–205.
[12] Fouvry S, Elleuch K, Simeon G. Prediction of crack initiation under
partial slip fretting conditions. J Strain Anal 2002;6:549–64.
[13] Johnson KL. Contacts mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 1985.
[14] Lamacq V. Amorc¸age et propagation de ﬁssures de fatigue sous
conditions de fretting: Approche the´orique et expe´rimentale. PhD
Thesis, Institut National de Sciences Applique´es, Lyon, 1997.
[15] Dubourg MC, Lamacq V. Stage 2 crack propagation direction
determination under fretting fatigue loading: a new approach in
accordance with experimental observation. ASTM STP 1367, 2000. p.
436–50.
[16] Greenwood JA. The area of contact between rough surfaces and ﬂats.
J Lubr Technol 1967;89:81.
[17] Ciavarella M. A ‘crack-like’ notch analogue for a safe-life fretting
fatigue design methodology. Fatigue Fract Eng M 2003;26(12):
1159–70.
[18] Smith KN, Watson P, Topper TH. A stress–strain function for the
fatigue of metals. J Mater, JLSMA 1970;5(4).
[19] Szolwinski M, Farris TN. Analysis and prediction of fretting fatigue in
2024-T351 aluminium alloy. Wear 1998;221:24–36.
[20] Fridrici V. Fretting d’un alliage de titane reve´tu et lubriﬁe´. PhD
Thesis, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, 2002.
[21] Hills
DA.
Mechanics
of fretting
fatigue.
Dordrecht:
Kluwer
Academic; 1994.
[22] Fouvry S, Kapsa P, Sidoroff F, Vincent L. Identiﬁcation of the
characteristic length scale for fatigue cracking in fretting contacts.
J Phys IV France 8 1998;Pr8:159–66.
[23] Arau´jo JA, Nowell D. The effect of rapidly varying contact stress
ﬁelds on fretting fatigue. Int J Fatigue 2002;24:763–75.
[24] Naboulsi S, Mall S. Fretting fatigue crack initiation behaviour using
process approach and ﬁnite element analysis. Tribol Int 2003;36:
121–31.
H. Proudhon et al. / International Journal of Fatigue 27 (2005) 569–579
579