PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) Terahertz Kerr effect in a methylammonium lead bromide perovskite crystal A. A.
Melnikov,1,* V. E. Anikeeva ,1,2 O. I. Semenova ,3 and S. V. Chekalin1 1Institute for Spectroscopy RAS, Fizicheskaya 5, Troitsk, Moscow 108840, Russia 2HSE University, Myasnitskaya ul. 20, Moscow 101000, Russia 3A.V.
Rzhanov Institute of Semiconductor Physics RAS, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia (Received 2 November 2021; revised 25 February 2022; accepted 25 April 2022; published 6 May 2022) We have observed short-lived optical birefringence in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal induced by a powerful nearly single-cycle terahertz pulse.
Apart from the instantaneous contribution that follows the proﬁle of the squared pump electric ﬁeld, the recorded anisotropy signal contains an exponential component decaying in ∼350 fs, underdamped oscillations at the frequency of ∼0.16 THz and an intermediate picosecond relaxation process with a Gaussian tail.
We associate these three nontrivial features with, respectively, Kerr effect in the inorganic lattice, terahertz-induced transient alignment of CH3NH+ 3 cations, and their coherent rotation excited by the terahertz pulse in a Raman process.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.105.174304 I. INTRODUCTION Lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) have the chemical formula ABX 3 common to all perovskite compounds.
Inorganic atoms B = Pb and X = Cl, Br, or I form a framework of BX 6 octahe- dra, while A cations are located at the centers of cages formed by the octahedra [1,2].
The key distinction of hybrid LHPs is that their A cations are organic molecules, such as CH3NH+ 3 .
In contrast to single-atom cations of fully inorganic LHPs, CH3NH+ 3 has rotational degrees of freedom inside the cage and possesses a permanent dipole moment.
Via their dipole moments, organic cations can interact with the inorganic lat- tice, with neighboring cations, and with free charge carriers introduced, e.g., via light absorption or electrical doping.
Due to coexistence of the polarizable inorganic framework with the sublattice of polar rotating cations, a hybrid LHP crystal represents a rather exotic system, which is of great interest from the fundamental point of view.
In order to describe and interpret the resulting complex physics, the concepts that are rather unusual for semiconductors are often employed by drawing analogies with polar liquids [3–5], glasses [6,7], and plastic crystals [8].
Interactions between the cations and the charge carriers cause favorable transport properties of hybrid LHPs that trig- gered their fast rise as unique materials for photovoltaics [9].
Carriers in the conduction and valence bands are be- lieved to be stabilized as large polarons formed through the coupling with the ensemble of polar cations [10].
Thereby their interaction with charged defects is screened, promot- ing moderate carrier mobility and large diffusion lengths in inherently defect-rich hybrid LHPs [11].
The electron-hole recombination is rather slow in hybrid LHPs [2], which is also interpreted as the effect of cation dynamics.
A possi- ble reason is that the local orientational ordering of cations *melnikov@isan.troitsk.ru distorts the inorganic lattice, which makes the band gap indirect, decreasing carrier recombination rate [12].
The con- comitant dipole ordering creates macroscopic electric ﬁelds that induce separation of charge carriers.
Since rotational dynamics of organic cations is of crucial importance for the physics of hybrid LHPs, it has been stud- ied by various theoretical and experimental methods.
Among them are calorimetry [6], neutron scattering [13–15], and var- ious types of spectroscopy (NMR [16,17], microwave [18], infrared [19,20], Raman [21], and ultrafast [5,22]).
As a re- sult, a general picture has emerged, according to which at low temperatures the rotational motion is limited to librations around speciﬁc directions inside the cage with occasional reorientational jumps, while at higher temperatures in the cubic phase it can be treated as quasifree rotation [14].
The relative timescales of the motion were also roughly deter- mined allowing to distinguish subpicosecond wobbling and slower reorientation [22].
However, the characteristic values obtained for the same LHP compounds can vary by almost two orders of magnitude.
There is still no clear uniﬁed picture of organic cation dynamics and its relation to other fundamental processes in LHPs remains not fully understood.
One of the ultrafast spectroscopic methods that were used to study cation dynamics in LHPs is the observation of the transient optical Kerr effect.
This is a well-established tool for the investigation of molecular orientational dynamics [23,24].
Ultrashort laser pulses are used to exert a torque on molecules in a medium under study via their hyperpolarizability.
The result of this action is a small average molecular alignment that reveals itself as transient optical birefringence of the sam- ple, provided the molecules are nonspherically symmetric.
This birefringence can be measured with a temporally delayed probe laser pulse in the standard polarization-resolved pump- probe experiment.
The recorded decay of the Kerr signal contains valuable information on the orientational relaxation since it is approximately proportional to the correlation func- tion of collective polarizability, while the latter is deﬁned 2469-9950/2022/105(17)/174304(8) 174304-1 ©2022 American Physical SocietyA. A. MELNIKOV et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) mainly by single-molecule and pair orientational correlation functions [25].
Femtosecond optical Kerr effect in both hybrid and inorganic LHP crystals was studied in Refs.
[5,26] where an evidence of the liquidlike response was obtained in the form of a picosecond nonexponential relaxation.
However, in a recent publication [27] it was claimed to be an experimental artifact due to propagation effects experienced by femtosec- ond near-resonant pulses.
In this work we study the optical Kerr effect induced in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal by a powerful terahertz pulse and ﬁnd signatures of collective rotational dynamics of methylammonium cations.
Unlike femtosecond laser pulses, single-cycle terahertz pulses act directly on the permanent electric dipole of a polar molecule, thereby exerting a torque on the latter.
As a result, both the alignment and the ori- entation of the molecules occur, though only the former is accessible if the birefringence of the sample is probed.
One more key difference is that the characteristic timescale of variation of the electric ﬁeld of the terahertz pulse is ∼1 ps compared to ∼1 fs for femtosecond laser pulses.
In combina- tion with the high strength of the electric ﬁeld, this leads to a relatively high amplitude of induced molecular rotation during the pulse.
Therefore, the detected Kerr signal can be consider- ably stronger in the case of terahertz excitation [28]. II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS In our experiments we studied a 1.8-mm-thick CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal grown from solution using the technique described in Refs. [29,30].
The original method was developed for CH3NH3PbI3, and the following modiﬁcations were made in order to adapt it for bromide crystal growth.
CH3NH3Br precursor was synthesized by adding dropwise 28 ml of aqueous (40%) methylamine solution to 44 ml of aqueous (48%) HBr solution without preliminary H3PO2 stabilization.
The synthesis proceeded for 2 h during the reaction with continuous stirring at 0 ◦C. A precipitate of yellowish color obtained by evaporation of the reaction mixture at 60 ◦C–70 ◦C was then washed with acetone to produce snow-white crystals.
PbBr2 was synthesized dissolving 28 g of crystalline lead acetate hydrate in 78.5 ml of an aqueous (48%) HBr solution.
At the ﬁnal stage 18.45 g of CH3NH3Br were added to the ﬂask with the synthesized PbBr2, resulting in an orange precipitate of perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3. CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals were grown from the obtained powder in the same way as CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals.
The crystal that was investigated in our experiments had a polyhedral shape somewhat similar to a rhombic dodecahedron.
Therefore, we tentatively identiﬁed the studied surface as (110).
Although CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals are relatively stable un- der ambient conditions, one can expect certain modiﬁcation of the crystal surface and adjacent layers as a result of regular exposure to air during long repeated measurements.
Several months after the experiments reported in this work were per- formed, we have repeated measurements with fresh samples and observed generally similar transient signals with a certain difference that was caused naturally by a variation of the pump terahertz waveform.
In order to detect the Kerr response of the crystal we used the standard pump-probe layout, in which a pump terahertz pulse excites the sample, while a temporally delayed probe pulse is used to measure the induced birefringence.
All exper- iments were performed at room temperature and in ambient air.
Nearly single-cycle terahertz pulses with a duration of ∼1 ps and peak electric ﬁeld strength of up to ∼500 kV/cm were generated using the technique of optical rectiﬁcation of fem- tosecond pulses with tilted fronts.
The details of the method can be found elsewhere [31,32].
The direction of the pump ter- ahertz pulse polarization vector relative to the sample crystal axes was arbitrary.
Weak femtosecond laser pulses of ∼50-fs duration at 800 nm were used for probing.
Before passing through the sample the probe pulse was polarized at 45◦ relative to the vertical polarization direction of the terahertz electric ﬁeld.
After the sample, the polarization of the probe pulse was rotated by ∼20◦with a half-wave plate.
Then the probe beam was transmitted through a Wollaston prism in or- der to split it into vertically and horizontally polarized beams.
The latter were guided to the ampliﬁed photodiodes, peak amplitudes of the signals from which were proportional to the intensities of the orthogonally polarized components Ix and Iy.
The result of each individual measurement was a dependence of the quantity F = (1 −Ix/Iy)pump on ÷ (1 −Ix/Iy)pump off on the delay time between the terahertz and the probe pulses.
If nx and ny are the refractive indices of the sample experi- enced by horizontally and vertically polarized probe pulses, respectively, and n = nx −ny, then F ∝n in the limit of low n.
We note here that without the additional rotation of polarization after the sample by the half-wave plate the detected signal would be close to zero since the appearance of a small n induces ellipticity of the probe beam, while the major axis of that ellipse remains directed at 45◦to the pump electric ﬁeld. III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The optical anisotropy signal F(t) detected using pump terahertz pulses with the highest available peak electric ﬁeld strength of ∼500 kV/cm is shown in Fig. 1.
The inset illus- trates time dependence of the pump electric ﬁeld ETHz(t).
This temporal proﬁle was measured via electro-optic detection of an attenuated terahertz pulse in a ZnTe crystal.
The attenua- tion was necessary since such strong terahertz ﬁelds cannot be measured correctly by this method because of pronounced nonlinear effects in ZnTe.
It was performed by a 1-mm-thick fused silica plate covered by a thin metal ﬁlm (total opti- cal density of ∼4 in the visible range).
The plate caused a certain effective lengthening of the terahertz pulse due to high-frequency absorption and dispersion of fused silica in the terahertz range.
Although this effect was visible in the experimental data (see below), it was rather small, so that it was possible to treat the measured waveform as a good approximation of the real pump terahertz pulse.
Weak electric ﬁeld oscillations after ∼1 ps were caused by the absorption of the terahertz radiation in air and were neglected since the studied effect was quadratic in electric ﬁeld.
Speciﬁc relaxation components that comprise the F(t) sig- nal are relatively well separated in the time domain, which makes them easier to disentangle.
It is possible to select three 174304-2TERAHERTZ KERR EFFECT IN A METHYLAMMONIUM … PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) FIG. 1.
Transient optical anisotropy of the sample induced by the pump terahertz pulse.
The inset shows a typical time dependence of the electric ﬁeld strength of the pulse.
characteristic time windows.
In the ﬁrst one, roughly from −1.0 to 0.5 ps, the probe pulse overlaps with the pump ter- ahertz pulse and the induced anisotropy is determined mainly by the electric ﬁeld of the latter.
The second window spans from ∼0.5 ps to ∼3 ps and contains a monotonically decaying component of the signal.
The third window from ∼3 ps to ∼12 ps is occupied by weak low-frequency underdamped oscillations.
Below we extract parameters of these temporal components and relate them to speciﬁc physical processes initiated in the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal by the pump terahertz pulse.
In Fig. 2 we compare the starting part of the optical anisotropy signal F(t) with the squared electric ﬁeld E2 THz(t).
It can be seen that the positions of ﬁrst three peaks of E2 THz(t) are slightly wider spaced than those of F(t).
This temporal spreading was introduced by the electric ﬁeld measurement procedure and was a result of the attenuation of terahertz radiation, as discussed above.
Here this effect can be neglected and the corresponding peaks of E2 THz(t) and F(t) treated as synchronous.
As follows from Fig. 2, the relative amplitudes of the peaks are very similar for both transients and F(t) almost “follows” the E2 THz(t) waveform in the region of the pump and probe pulse temporal overlap.
Therefore, we as- sociate the initial part of the optical anisotropy signal from −1.0 to 0.5 ps with the instantaneous Kerr effect of electronic origin.
It is hardly possible to ascribe it exclusively to the inorganic lattice of the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal or to its sublat- tice of organic cations since both subsystems can in principle contribute to the Kerr signal of this type.
We have additionally measured the dependence of the peak F(t) value on the peak strength of the pump electric ﬁeld.
The result is presented in the inset to Fig. 2.
The obtained set of experimental points can be rather well ﬁtted by a parabola y = ax2 conﬁrming the quadratic dependence.
The interme- diate picosecond relaxation in the time window from ∼0.5 to ∼3 ps also demonstrated quadratic variation with the electric ﬁeld strength.
However, it was practically impossible in our FIG. 2.
Comparison of the initial evolution of the optical anisotropy signal (solid line) with the squared electric ﬁeld of the pump terahertz pulse (dashed line with ﬁlled area below it).
The inset demonstrates the dependence of the peak amplitude of the F(t) signal (circles) on the peak electric ﬁeld and its parabolic ﬁt by the y = ax2 function (solid line).
experiments to measure properly the ﬁeld dependence of the amplitude of oscillations because of its very small value.
The observed similarity of the initial part of the F(t) signal and the squared electric ﬁeld waveform E2 THz(t) implies that in our experiment the temporal resolution is maintained despite possible propagation effects.
Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that group refractive indices for the pump terahertz and the 800-nm probe pulses will differ considerably.
It is particu- larly true for solids with a rich spectrum of dipole-active phonons, like LHPs.
This difference implies a corresponding large difference of group velocities of the pulses.
As a result, in a sufﬁciently thick transparent sample the probe pulse will “scan” the pump-induced response during propagation through the former and despite the ﬁxed pump-probe delay time the signal from a wide time window will be integrated.
In this case, the temporal resolution decreases, while the signal becomes distorted.
This effect can be approximately visual- ized by performing the convolution of a well-resolved signal with a “pulse” of a rectangular shape, the duration of which depends on the values of the group refractive indices.
We have performed such calculations for the measured E2 THz(t) proﬁle and found that for F(t) to have the observed speciﬁc shape in the interval −1.0 ps < t < 0.5 ps, the total time lag between the pump and the probe pulses should not exceed δτ ∼300 fs after traveling through the sample.
This time can be estimated also as δτ ∼L(nTHz −ngr pr)/c, where L is the sample thickness, nTHz and ngr pr are the refractive index at pump wavelength and the group refractive index at probe wavelength, respectively.
While npr can be readily found in literature [33], the avail- able data on the optical properties of CH3NH3PbBr3 in the terahertz range are scarce.
Here we rely on the values of nTHz provided in Ref.
[34] for thin ﬁlms of CH3NH3PbBr3.
We take nTHz = 8 at 1 THz and ngr pr ≈npr = 2 at 800 nm.
Using the 174304-3A. A. MELNIKOV et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) FIG.
3. (a) Magniﬁed view of the oscillatory part of the signal (solid line) and its ﬁt (dotted line).
(b) The residual monotonic component of the signal.
The inset shows it in the logarithmic scale along the y axis.
value and the formula for δτ mentioned above we obtain as a rough estimate that the sample thickness should be not larger than 15 μm, which is much less than the actual thickness of the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal (1.8 mm).
The values of extinction (κTHz ≈5) and absorption (α ≈200 cm−1) coefﬁcients from Refs.
[34] and [35] imply that the absorption length for the radiation at 1 THz in CH3NH3PbBr3 is ∼5 and ∼50 μm, respectively.
Therefore, we can conclude that the observed signal originates from a sufﬁciently thin layer of the crystal (on the order of ∼10 μm) and the propagation effects can be neglected.
Next, we proceed to the analysis of the oscillations that dominate the F(t) signal from ∼3 to ∼12 ps.
The magniﬁed view of this region is shown in Fig. 3(a).
We have found that they can be well ﬁtted by the function A1 exp(−t/τosc) sin[(2π/T )t + φ], where the lifetime and the period of the oscillations are τosc = 2.1 ± 0.3 ps and T = 6.1 ± 0.2 ps.
The latter corresponds to a frequency of 164 ± 5 GHz (5.5 ± 0.2 cm−1 or 0.68 ± 0.02 meV).
Such a low frequency can hardly be associated with the vibra- tions of inorganic framework of CH3NH3PbBr3.
Indeed, the lowest-frequency phonons of LHP crystals that are due to collective dynamics of PbX6 octahedra (tilting, rotation) or pe- riodic translational motions of cations inside inorganic cages (rattling modes) have energies of several meVs and higher [13,36–40].
Probably the lowest energy of a phonon mode in a LHP crystal reported to date was measured for coopera- tive two-dimensional rotations of PbBr6 octahedra in a fully inorganic CsPbBr3 crystal (∼1 meV) [40].
However, these are zone-boundary phonons, which cannot be accessed by optical probing.
Besides, such low-frequency modes in hybrid LHPs are typically overdamped at room temperature and no long-lived coherence can be generated via their impulsive excitation.
It is thus natural to suppose that the observed oscilla- tions are caused by coherent rotational dynamics of organic CH3NH+ 3 cations (here by ”rotational dynamics” we mean rotation around the axis that is perpendicular to the C-N axis).
This mechanism is essentially the impulsive stimulated rota- tional Raman scattering and implies that the pump terahertz pulse creates a coherent superposition of wave functions of rotational levels of CH3NH+ 3 coupled via allowed Raman transitions.
For the simplest case of linear molecules the radiation couples rotational levels, the angular momenta of which differ by J = 2, which is a necessary condition for the observation of periodically modulated optical anisotropy of the excited molecular ensemble.
Then, the frequency of the observed oscillations of pump-induced birefringence is ν = E/h = 2B(2J + 3), where J is the angular momentum of the lower-lying of the two rotational states, and B is the rotational constant in cm−1.
Similar rules can be written for rigid symmetric top molecules, but for more complex rotors the information on exact positions of rotational levels should be obtained from experiments or theoretical calculations.
In- terestingly, in a recent study of terahertz Kerr effect in water, coherent oscillations were observed in the optical anisotropy response of the gaseous phase at elevated temperatures [41].
The frequency of those oscillations was ≈37 cm−1, which is close to the lowest-frequency line in the rotational Raman spectrum of water vapor [42,43].
Unfortunately, the rotational Raman spectrum of the CH3NH+ 3 molecular cation is not known.
However, if we applied the simple linear molecule model, we could predict coherent oscillations of terahertz-induced birefringence rather similar to those observed in our experiment.
Taking B ≈ 0.7 cm−1 (with a reference to the somewhat similar CH3NH2 molecule [44]) we obtain the following possible oscillation frequencies νJ (in cm−1): 4.2, 7, 9.8, 12.6, ... for J = 0, 1, 2, 3,... .
However, two factors favor excitation of only a few low- est frequencies from this series.
First, the terahertz waves at frequencies νTHz i and νTHz k , which take part in the elementary Raman scattering process, necessarily belong to the spectrum of the pump pulse.
Therefore, since νJ = νTHz i −νTHz k , and the amplitude of coherent rotations is proportional to the product of amplitudes of the waves, the efﬁciency of scattering will decrease fast for higher νJ. In addition, this effect will be further enhanced by the (νTHz i −νJ)4 frequency dependence of the Raman cross section.
In the framework of this model the measured frequency of 5.5 cm−1 turns out to be very close to the mean frequency of the ν0 and ν1 model Raman lines and, therefore, the observed oscillations can be the result of beating of these harmonics.
Due to the strong damping of oscillations it is possible in principle to achieve a decent reproduction of the observed oscillatory kinetics by constructing a linear combination of the 174304-4TERAHERTZ KERR EFFECT IN A METHYLAMMONIUM … PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) ν0 and ν1 modes with a certain adjustments of their phases and even with an additional smaller contribution of the next two or three modes.
Associating the coherent rotational motion with a limited set of impulsively excited rotational transitions, the frequencies of which depend only on the inertial properties of the CH3NH+ 3 molecule, allows an assumption that the decay of observed oscillations reﬂects the population relaxation.
Then, the extracted decay time τosc = 2.1 ± 0.3 ps can be ascribed to the damping of rotations of individual CH3NH+ 3 cations caused by their interaction with host inorganic cages.
There are of course a number of important potential cor- rections, which can affect this simpliﬁed model considerably.
Among them are a more precise deﬁnition of the rotational constant, calculation of the rotational spectrum taking into account nonzero values of the angular momentum around the molecule axis and possible rotations of the CH3 and NH3 groups, as well as a proper treatment of the stimulated scattering of the terahertz pulse with a broad spectrum of frequencies in the vicinity of rotational transitions.
However, these reﬁnements complicate the problem considerably and require a separate study that is beyond the scope of this work.
The part of the signal that remains after subtraction of the ﬁtted oscillatory component is shown in Fig. 3(b) starting from the delay time of 0.5 ps.
This monotonic relaxation has a clearly nonexponential character, which is emphasized in the inset to Fig. 3(b), where this curve is plotted in the logarithmic scale.
Here it can be seen that the initial fast subpicosecond decay is followed by a slower relaxation with a Gaussian-type tail.
This speciﬁc form of the Kerr effect decay curve (fast decrease with an adjacent “shoulder”) is rather common for liquids in the case of excitation by a short femtosecond laser pulse [25,45,46].
The nonexponential part of the observed relaxation is often interpreted as laser-induced overdamped coherent librations of molecules in “cages” formed by their momentary neighbors.
This process is modeled as a super- position of sine oscillators, the frequencies of which have a Gaussian distribution.
However, characteristic periods of these librations are on the order of several hundreds of fem- toseconds.
The librations of organic cations in hybrid LHPs are believed to have similar typical characteristic times of ∼300 fs.
This timescale is one order of magnitude shorter than the characteristic duration of the Gaussian “shoulder” in the Kerr response of CH3NH3PbBr3 observed in our experiment.
Moreover, this type of motion is likely to be irrelevant for the room-temperature cubic phase of CH3NH3PbBr3, when organic cation rotation is not restricted around a speciﬁc di- rection inside the inorganic cage.
One more process that may appear in the ultrafast optical Kerr response of a molecular ensemble as a Gaussian-type decay is the relaxation of initially aligned molecules via iner- tial rotation.
The characteristic timescale of this process can be estimated as √I/kT , where I is the moment of inertia of the molecules [47].
For CH3NH+ 3 this value is ∼0.3 ps, which is also much faster than the observed picosecond decay.
Moreover, the inertial decay of orientational correlations can be demonstrated in pure form only by free rotors, which is not the case of organic cations located in the inorganic cages.
For molecules in liquids the timescale of several picosec- onds is typical for the diffusive rotational motion. This regime FIG.
4. (a) The residual component of the monotonic signal after subtracting the function that ﬁts the Gaussian-type tail [shown in (b)].
supersedes the inertial relaxation for hindered rotors that inter- act with their environment and as a result experience frequent changes of the phase of rotation [48].
It should be noted that the diffusive decay of orientational correlations usually has exponential character and for liquids composed of symmetric top molecules it is even single exponential.
For certain more complex systems, such as ensembles of molecules embedded in a solid medium, the decay can be described by a stretched exponential function or by a power law [49–51].
On the con- trary, compressed exponential relaxation and its special case, Gaussian decay, are rather uncommon.
However, we have found that a rather good model of the monotonic part of the observed Kerr signal can be constructed if we assume that the transient alignment of the CH3NH+ 3 molecules created by the pump terahertz pulse demonstrates Gaussian relaxation.
In this case, temporal evolution of the orientational correlation function of the organic cations is deﬁned by the factor e−(t/τ )2 assuming impulsive character of the terahertz excitation.
Through the anisotropic polar- izability of the molecules this behavior will be transferred to the correlation function of molecular polarizability C(t) with the corresponding contribution to the Kerr signal in the form of −dC(t)/dt ∝te−(t/τ )2 [25].
We have found that the latter function can serve as a rather good ﬁt of the mono- tonic component of the detected signal starting from ∼1.5 ps, which is illustrated by Fig. 4(b).
The ﬁtting procedure provided the value τ = 1.65 ± 0.05 ps.
The residual shown in Fig. 4(a) represents a fast single-exponential relaxation with a characteristic time of 350 ± 10 fs, which can be associ- ated with the Kerr response of the inorganic lattice of the CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal in accordance with the interpretation proposed in Ref. [5].
Gaussian decay observed here can be an evidence of co- operative effects during orientational relaxation of CH3NH+ 3 cations.
Here it is possible to draw an analogy with glassy materials, and in particular with metal glasses, for which a compressed exponential decay of the density correla- tion function was observed [52].
It was suggested that relaxation of a local density ﬂuctuation induces a long- range elastic deformation ﬁeld, which stimulates structural 174304-5A. A. MELNIKOV et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) relaxation at neighboring sites of the medium.
In this way an “avalanche” of relaxation events is launched, resulting in the ensemble-averaged decay that is faster than exponential.
In our case we study ﬂuctuations of orientation of molecules and the timescales are orders of magnitude shorter.
However, CH3NH+ 3 cations rotating in the inorganic cages interact with each other via their permanent dipoles or via local lattice distortions that they create upon rotation.
Thereby collective relaxational effects and Gaussian decay of terahertz-induced cation alignment may become possible.
IV. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we observed the optical Kerr response of a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal to an intense terahertz pulse.
We decomposed the signal into several distinct decay com- ponents and suggested an assignment of each component to a certain relaxation process taking into account the hybrid structure of the perovskite.
The initial fast subpicosecond decay was interpreted as the Kerr effect in the inorganic lattice of the crystal.
The slower relaxation on the timescale of sev- eral picoseconds was ascribed to the rotational dynamics of organic CH3NH+ 3 cations.
It comprises a Gaussian-type de- cay and weak underdamped low-frequency oscillations.
The former can be associated with diffusive relaxation of cation alignment created by the pump electric ﬁeld, while the fact that it follows the compressed exponential law can be a signa- ture of collective glasslike dynamics.
Oscillations are due to coherent rotations of individual cations induced in the process of impulsive stimulated rotational Raman scattering of the terahertz pulse.
The characteristic relaxation times determined in the framework of the suggested interpretation can be used to model interactions of organic cations with inorganic lattice and with each other.
Observation of the strong-ﬁeld terahertz Kerr effect in CH3NH3PbBr3 and other hybrid lead-halide perovskites at lower temperatures is also of great interest since it implies studies of nonlinear dynamics of organic cations, the motion of which is initially restricted along certain directions inside inorganic cages.
Since the applied method allows visualization of rotational dynamics in real time, it can be effectively combined with dynamic or quasistatic stimuli like excitation of electrons, application of external ﬁelds, or heating in order to study interaction of organic cations with charge carriers and their dynamics at phase transitions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The reported study was partially supported by the Aca- demic Fund Program at the HSE University (Grant No. 21-04-016).
[1] T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzeld, and T. J. White, Synthesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 for solid-state sensitised solar cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 5628 (2013).
[2] T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes, and D. Cahen, Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites: Low-cost semi- conductors with intriguing charge-transport properties, Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 15007 (2016).
[3] N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo, and H. Suga, Dielectric study of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I), J. Phys. Chem.
Solids 53, 935 (1992).
[4] J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, What is moving in hybrid halide perovskite solar cells? Acc. Chem.
Res. 49, 528 (2016).
[5] H. Zhu, K. Miyata, Y. Fu, J. Wang, P. P. Joshi, D. Niesner, K. W. Williams, S. Jin, and X.-Y. Zhu, Screening in crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid perovskites, Science 353, 1409 (2016).
[6] D. H. Fabini, T. Hogan, H. A. Evans, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis, and R. Seshadri, Dielectric and thermodynamic signatures of low-temperature glassy dynamics in the hybrid perovskites CH3NH3PbI3 and HC(NH2)2PbI3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 376 (2016).
[7] M. Simenas, S. Balciunas, J. N. Wilson, S. Svirskas, M. Kinka, A. Garbaras, V. Kalendra, A. Gagor, D. Szewczyk, A. Sieradzki, M. Maczka, V. Samulionis, A. Walsh, R. Grigalaitis, and J. Banys, Suppression of phase transitions and glass phase sig- natures in mixed cation halide perovskites, Nat. Commun. 11, 5103 (2020).
[8] J. Even, M. Carignano, and C. Katan, Molecular disorder and translation/rotation coupling in the plastic crystal phase of hy- brid perovskites, Nanoscale 8, 6222 (2016).
[9] A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, and T. Miyasaka, Halide perovskite photovoltaics: Background, status, and future prospects, Chem.
Rev. 119, 3036 (2019).
[10] X.-Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Charge carriers in hybrid organic- inorganic lead halide perovskites might be protected as large polarons, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 4758 (2015).
[11] S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza, and H. J. Snaith, Electron-hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber, Science 342, 341 (2013).
[12] C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi, and S. Sanvito, Revealing the role of organic cations in hy- brid halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nat. Commun. 6, 7026 (2015).
[13] I. P. Swainson, C. Stock, S. F. Parker, L. Van Eijck, M. Russina, and J. W. Taylor, From soft harmonic phonons to fast relaxational dynamics in CH3NH3PbBr3, Phys.
Rev. B 92, 100303(R) (2015).
[14] A. M. A. Leguy, J. M. Frost, A. P. McMahon, V. G. Sakai, W. Kochelmann, C. Law, X. Li, F. Foglia, A. Walsh, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson, J. T. Cabral, and P. R. F. Barnes, The dynamics of methylammonium ions in hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun. 6, 7124 (2015).
[15] B. Li, Y. Kawakita, Y. Liu, M. Wang, M. Matsuura, K. Shibata, S. Ohira-Kawamura, T. Yamada, S. Lin, K. Nakajima, and S. F. Liu, Polar rotor scattering as atomic-level origin of low mobil- ity and thermal conductivity of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nat. Commun. 8, 16086 (2017).
[16] R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop, and J. B. Macdonald, Cation ro- tation in methylammonium lead halides, Solid State Commun. 56, 581 (1985).
174304-6TERAHERTZ KERR EFFECT IN A METHYLAMMONIUM … PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) [17] W.-C. Qiao, J. Wu, R. Zhang, W. Ou-Yang, X. Chen, G. Yang, Q. Chen, X. L. Wang, H. F. Wang, and Y.-F. Yao, In situ NMR investigation of the photoresponse of perovskite crystal, Matter 3, 2042 (2020).
[18] A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, Dynamic disorder in methylam- moniumtrihalogenoplumbates (II) observed by millimeter-wave spectroscopy, J. Chem.
Phys. 87, 6373 (1987).
[19] N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo, and H. Suga, Calorimetric and IR spectroscopic studies of phase transitions in methylam- monium trihalogenoplumbates (II), J. Phys. Chem.
Solids 51, 1383 (1990).
[20] K. N. Boldyrev, V. E. Anikeeva, O. I. Semenova, and M. N. Popova, Infrared spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid perovskite: Signatures of phase transitions and of organic cation dynamics, J. Phys. Chem.
C 124, 23307 (2020).
[21] Y. Guo, O. Yaffe, D. W. Paley, A. N. Beecher, T. D. Hull, G. Szpak, J. S. Owen, L. E. Brus, and M. A. Pimenta, Interplay between organic cations and inorganic framework and incom- mensurability in hybrid lead-halide perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3, Phys.
Rev. Materials 1, 042401(R) (2017).
[22] A. A. Bakulin, O. Selig, H. J. Bakker, Y. L. A. Rezus, C. Muller, T. Glaser, R. Lovrincic, Z. Sun, Z. Chen, A. Walsh, J. M. Frost, and T. L. C. Jansen, Real-time observation of organic cation reorientation in methylammonium lead iodide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 3663 (2015).
[23] R. Righini, Ultrafast optical kerr effect in liquids and solids, Science 262, 1386 (1993).
[24] D. McMorrow, W. T. Lotshaw, and G. A. Kenney-Wallace, Femtosecond optical Kerr studies on the origin of the nonlinear responses in simple liquids, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 24, 443 (1988).
[25] B. Kohler and K. A. Nelson, Femtosecond impulsive stimulated light scattering from liquid carbon at high pressure: Experiment and computer simulation, J. Phys. Chem. 96, 6532 (1992).
[26] K. Miyata, D. Meggiolaro, M. Tuan Trinh, P. P. Joshi, E. Mosconi, S. C. Jones, F. De Angelis, and X.-Y. Zhu, Large po- larons in lead halide perovskites, Sci. Adv. 3, e1701217 (2017).
[27] S. F. Maehrlein, P. P. Joshia, L. Huber, F. Wang, M. Cherasse, Y. Liu, D. M. Juraschek, E. Mosconi, D. Meggiolaro, F. De Angelis, and X.-Y. Zhu, Decoding ultrafast polarization re- sponses in lead halide perovskites by the two-dimensional opti- cal Kerr effect, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 118, e2022268118 (2021).
[28] M. Sajadi, M. Wolf, and T. Kampfrath, Transient birefringence of liquids induced by terahertz electric-ﬁeld torque on perma- nent molecular dipoles, Nat. Commun. 8, 14963 (2017).
[29] O. I. Semenova, E. S. Yudanova, N. A. Yeryukov, Y. A. Zhivodkov, T. S. Shamirzaev, E. A. Maximovskiy, S. A. Gromilov, and I. B. Troitskaia, Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 crys- tals and ﬁlms.
Synthesis and characterization, J. Cryst.
Growth 462, 45 (2017).
[30] E. S. Yudanova, T. A. Duda, O. E. Tereshchenko, and O. I. Semenova, Properties of methylammonium lead iodide per- ovskite single crystals, J. Struct. Chem. 58, 1567 (2017).
[31] A. G. Stepanov, J. Hebling, and J. Kuhl, Efﬁcient generation of subpicosecond terahertz radiation by phase-matched optical rectiﬁcation using ultrashort laser pulses with tilted pulse fronts, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3000 (2003).
[32] A. A. Melnikov, K. N. Boldyrev, Yu.
G. Selivanov, V. P. Martovitskii, S. V. Chekalin, and E. A. Ryabov, Coherent phonons in a Bi2Se3 ﬁlm generated by an intense single-cycle THz pulse, Phys.
Rev. B 97, 214304 (2018).
[33] M. S. Alias, I. Dursun, M. I. Saidaminov, E. M. Diallo, P. Mishra, T. K. Ng, O. M. Bakr, and B. S. Ooi, Optical constants of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite thin ﬁlms measured by spectro- scopic ellipsometry, Opt.
Express 24, 16586 (2016).
[34] A. V. Andrianov, A. N. Aleshin, A. O. Zakhar’in, and L. B. Matyushkin, Terahertz optical characteristics of organometal- lic lead-iodide (bromide) perovskites and cesium lead halide nanocrystals, in 43rd International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz), 2018 (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2018), pp. 1–2.
[35] I. Maeng, S. Lee, H. Tanaka, J.-H. Yun, S. Wang, M. Nakamura, Y.-K. Kwon, and M.-C. Jung, Unique phonon modes of a CH3NH3PbBr3 hybrid perovskite ﬁlm without the inﬂuence of defect structures: An attempt toward a novel THz-based appli- cation, NPG Asia Mater. 12, 53 (2020).
[36] A. C. Ferreira, S. Paofai, A. Létoublon, J. Ollivier, S. Raymond, B. Hehlen, B. Rufﬂé, S. Cordier, C. Katan, J. Even, and P. Bourges, Direct evidence of weakly dispersed and strongly anharmonic optical phonons in hybrid perovskites, Commun. Phys. 3, 48 (2020).
[37] D. Zhao, J. M. Skelton, H. Hu, C. La-o-vorakiat, J.-X. Zhu, R. A. Marcus, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle, Y. M. Lam, A. Walsh, and E. E. M. Chia, Low-frequency optical phonon modes and carrier mobility in the halide perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 using tera- hertz time-domain spectroscopy, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 111, 201903 (2017).
[38] S. Poncé, M. Schlipf, and F. Giustino, Origin of low carrier mo- bilities in halide perovskites, ACS Energy Lett. 4, 456 (2019).
[39] F. Song, C. Qian, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, K. Peng, S. Wu, X. Xie, J. Yang, S. Sun, Y. Yu, J. Dang, S. Xiao, L. Yang, K. Jin, H. Zhong, and X. Xu, Hot polarons with trapped excitons and octahedra-twist phonons in CH3NH3PbBr3 hy- brid perovskite nanowires, Laser Photonics Rev. 14, 1900267 (2020).
[40] T. Lanigan-Atkins, X. He, M. J. Krogstad, D. M. Pajerowski, D. L. Abernathy, Guangyong N. M. N. Xu, Zhijun Xu, D.-Y. Chung, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. Rosenkranz, R. Osborn, and O. Delaire, Two-dimensional overdamped ﬂuctuations of the soft perovskite lattice in CsPbBr3, Nat. Mater. 20, 977 (2021).
[41] H. Elgabarty, T. Kampfrath, D. J. Bonthuis, V. Balos, N. K. Kaliannan, P. Loche, R. R. Netz, M. Wolf, T. D. Kühne, and M. Sajadi, Energy transfer within the hydrogen bonding network of water following resonant terahertz excitation, Sci. Adv. 6, eaay7074 (2020).
[42] E. Nordström, A. Bohlin, and P.-E. Bengtsson, Pure rotational Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy of water vapor and its relevance for combustion diagnostics, J. Raman Spectrosc. 44, 1322 (2013).
[43] G. Avila, G. Tejeda, J. M. Fernandez, and S. Montero, The rotational Raman spectra and cross sections of H2O, D2O, and HDO, J. Mol.
Spectrosc. 220, 259 (2003).
[44] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure III.
Electronic Spectra and Electronic Structure of Polyatomic Molecules (Van Nostrand, New York, 1966).
[45] E. L. Quitevis and M. Neelakandan, Femtosecond optical Kerr effect studies of liquid methyl iodide, J. Phys.
Chem. 100, 10005 (1996).
174304-7A. A. MELNIKOV et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 105, 174304 (2022) [46] Y. J. Chang and E. W. Castner, Jr., Intermolecular dynamics of substituted benzene and cyclohexane liquids, studied by fem- tosecond nonlinear-optical polarization spectroscopy, J. Phys.
Chem. 100, 3330 (1996).
[47] W. A. Steele, Molecular reorientation in liquids. II.
Angular autocorrelation functions, J. Chem.
Phys. 38, 2411 (1963).
[48] M. Tim, T. A. Jackson, and P. A. Anﬁnrud, in Ultrafast In- frared and Raman Spectroscopy, edited by M. D. Fayer (Marcel Dekker, New York, 2001).
[49] J.-M. Zanotti, M.-C. Bellissent-Funel, and S.-H. Chen, Relax- ational dynamics of supercooled water in porous glass, Phys.
Rev. E 59, 3084 (1999).
[50] D. Laage and W. H. Thompson, Reorientation dynamics of nanoconﬁned water: Power-law decay, hydrogen-bond jumps, and test of a two-state model, J. Chem.
Phys. 136, 044513 (2012).
[51] S. Romero-Vargas Castrillón, N. Giovambattista, I. A. Aksay, and P. G. Debenedetti, Effect of surface polarity on the struc- ture and dynamics of water in nanoscale conﬁnement, J. Phys. Chem. B 113, 1438 (2009).
[52] K. Trachenko and A. Zaccone, Slow stretched-exponential and fast compressed-exponential relaxation from local event dynamics, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 33, 315101 (2021). 174304-8