Electric ﬁeld control and optical signature of entanglement in quantum dot molecules Gabriel Bester and Alex Zunger National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA Received 1 July 2005; published 25 October 2005 The degree of entanglement of an electron with a hole in a vertically coupled self-assembled dot molecule is shown to be tunable by an external electric ﬁeld.
Using atomistic pseudopotential calculations followed by a conﬁguration interaction many-body treatment of correlations, we calculate the electronic states, degree of entanglement, and optical absorption.
We offer a way to spectroscopically detect the magnitude of electric ﬁeld needed to maximize the entanglement.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.72.165334 PACS numbers: 73.21.La, 78.67.Hc, 03.67.Mn I. INTRODUCTION A pair of quantum dots or a “quantum dot molecule” QDM occupied by two electrons1,2 or by an electron-hole pair3 have been offered1–3 as a basis for quantum computing.
The fundamental requirement for such a quantum algorithm is the availability of entangled states and the ability to en- tangle and disentangle the quantum bits qubits.
In the con- text of a dot molecule, an entangled electron-hole pair can be represented by the the maximally entangled Bell state eThT +eBhB, where e and h stand for the electron and the hole the two qubits and T and B for their localizations in top or bottom dot.
The original proposal3 and subsequent experiments3–5 for entangled electron-hole pairs in QDMs promised a high degree of entanglement3 based on analysis via simple models.
However, later theoretical work showed6 that electron-hole entanglement is generally low in such cases and develops a sharp maximum only at a speciﬁc in- terdot separation that critically depends on the size difference of the two dots.
Unfortunately, it has proven to be difﬁcult to experimentally control so precisely the interdot distance and the size difference of the two dots.
The question we address here is whether the degree of entanglement can be maxi- mized by other means, more accessible experimentally than a variation of the interdot separation.
We propose and quantify theoretically that it is possible to tune and control the degree of entanglement by applying an external electric ﬁeld in the growth direction.7–10 The use of electric ﬁeld has been dem- onstrated in quantum dots7–10 and very recently in a single quantum dot molecules.11,12 We predict that, while the en- tanglement at zero ﬁeld is generally low 35% for our case, it can reach a high value 75% in our case at a speciﬁc electric ﬁeld FS max.
Moreover, precisely at this ﬁeld the ﬁrst two exciton lines merge, giving a well-deﬁned spectroscopic signature of the point of maximum entanglement. II.
METHOD In order to obtain reliable results for the correlated exci- ton states, it is of foremost importance to accurately account for the multiband character of the hole states and for the correct strain dependence in the coupling region between the dots, as demonstrated in Refs. 6 and 13.
We have thus solved the pertinent Schrödinger equation atomistically, in a multiband fashion.
We use the Hamiltonian H = −1/22 +  ,n vr −Rn + VSO + eFz 1 under an external electric ﬁeld F applied in 001 z direc- tion.
The atomistic pseudopotentials v of atom of type  and the nonlocal spin-orbit potential VSO are ﬁt to reproduce InAs and GaAs bulk properties.6,14 The atomic positions Rn are obtained by minimizing the atomistic strain energy via valence force ﬁeld15 for a given shape and size of the dots.
The single-particle Hamiltonian is diagonalized in a basis  =  n,k An,kn,k 2 of pseudopotential Bloch functions n,k as outlined in Ref.
16, thus permitting coupling of various Bloch states.
Corre- lations are treated via a many-body expansion in Slater determinants17,18 where the electrons not included dynami- cally are represented by a model screening of the Coulomb and long and short range exchange.19 The entanglement is calculated according to the von Neumann entropy of entanglement13,20 S = −Tr A log2 A = −Tr B log2 B, 3 where A is the reduced density matrix for qubit “A” the electron and B is the reduced density matrix for qubit “B” the hole.
The density matrices are calculated from the cor- related CI exciton density which requires a projection of the exciton wave functions on the dot localized basis set.13 Our quantum dots have a truncated cone shape 12 nm base and 2 nm height with a composition ranging from pure InAs at the top to In0.5Ga0.5As at the base, as determined in Ref. 3.
The interdot separation, deﬁned as the wetting layer separa- tion of both dots, is ﬁxed at 7.9 nm.
We wish to emphasize that the numerical values of the electric ﬁeld where certain effects occur anticrossing of levels or maximum entangle- ment depends on the size and geometry of the dots so the speciﬁc values of ﬁelds should be taken only as illustrations. III.
SINGLE-PARTICLE PICTURE FOR THE DOT MOLECULE The bonding b and antibonding a electron molecular levels of a dot molecule will be denoted as Ea,Eb.
For an idealized mostly unrealistic symmetric case the lowest en- PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 1098-0121/2005/7216/1653347/$23.00 ©2005 The American Physical Society 165334-1ergy molecular orbitals MOs develop from single-dot elec- tron states eT and eB located on the bottom B and top T dots Eb = 1 	2 eT + eB, Ea = 1 	2 eT −eB, 4 and similarly for the holes Ha,Hb.
As shown previously,6,21 in reality, because of strain and random-alloy ﬂuctuations, one does not have a symmetric bonding-antibonding behav- ior even if the dot molecule is made of identical but non- spherical dots.
This is seen in Fig. 1 where both electron and hole molecular orbital wave functions are shown for zero electric ﬁeld F=0.
We see that the lighter-mass electrons tunnel between dots, forming bonding-antibonding states as in Eq. 4, but the heavier-mass holes remain localized on the top bottom dot for the bonding antibonding MO HbHa.
In Ref. 13 we showed that this inhibited hole tun- neling is created by a strain-induced repulsive barrier for the heavy-hole component of the wave functions.
The single- particle molecular orbital energy levels are shown in Fig. 2.
As we apply an electric ﬁeld the molecular levels that de- velop from the single-dot orbitals exhibit anticrossings.
The anticrossings show a much stronger tunneling for the elec- trons than for the holes.
We have indicated in Fig. 2 the major character of the molecular states Ea,Eb,Ha,Hb in terms of the localization on individual dots eT, eB, hT, and hB using the calculated MO wave functions of Fig. 1.
We see that for holes at positive ﬁelds Ha hB and Hb hT while for electrons Ea eT and Eb eB. The opposite is true for negative ﬁelds.
Thus, by applying an electric ﬁeld we can tune the localization of the MO’s and, for instance, compensate for size, composition or shape differences of both dots.
We will see that this tuning of localization will also control the degree of entanglement. IV.
OPTICAL TRANSITIONS: FROM THE SINGLE-PARTICLE TO MANY-BODY PICTURE There are four possible transitions between the four mo- lecular levels shown as vertical arrows in Fig. 2.
Their single-particle transition energies g i,j differences between the energies from Fig. 2 are given in Fig. 3a and show maxima and minima vs ﬁeld.
We note in Fig. 3a the char- acter of the four transitions in terms of localization on single- dot orbitals.
We see that at high ﬁelds, the lowest—and highest-energy transitions involve wave function localization on different dots: for example EbHb is eBhT at positive ﬁelds, and eThB at negative ﬁelds.
Thus, the corresponding dipole transitions are expected to be weak “dark states”.
In con- trast the second and third transitions at high ﬁelds involve the same dots: for example, EbHa is eBhB at positive ﬁelds and eThT at negative ﬁeld.
Thus, the corresponding dipole transitions are expected to be large “bright states”. The single-particle approximation underlying Fig. 3a is valid only in the case of large ﬁelds, where e-h Coulomb effects are small compared to the ﬁeld-driven variation in the single-particle levels.
At these large ﬁelds, the excitons are pure Slater determinants with localization on either eThT or eThB or eBhT or eBhB and therefore show no entanglement.
We will next see that in the interesting region of electric ﬁelds, e-h Coulomb interactions are crucial.
In Fig. 3b we show the calculated electron-hole Coulomb interaction Je,hi −j = i raj rbjrbira ra,rbra −rb dradrb 5 between the MOs i=Ea or Eb and j=Ha or Hb using the model of Resta19 for the screening .
Once again we give the character of the MO states EaHa,EaHb,EbHa,EbHb at large ﬁelds in terms of the dot-localized basis eThT, eThB, eBhT and eBhB.
Note that this analysis only applies to the large ﬁeld region whereas in the intermediate ﬁeld region, where the different Coulomb integrals are of similar magnitude, the FIG.
1. Color online Square of the ﬁrst two electron and ﬁrst two hole wave functions of an InGaAs/GaAs quantum dot as a function of elec- tric ﬁeld at an interdot separation d=7.9 nm. FIG. 2.
Single particle electron upper panel and hole lower panel eigenvalues as a function of electric ﬁeld for d=7.9 nm with respect to the GaAs valence band maximum.
We indicate the local- ization of the MOs on top and bottom dot by eT, eB,hT,hB. G. BESTER AND A. ZUNGER PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-2electron and hole wave functions are delocalized over both dots.
This interaction Je,h Fig. 3b shows the reverse be- havior vs ﬁeld compared with the MO energies g vs ﬁeld Fig. 3a. For example, whereas Je,hEbHb is maximal less negative at large positive or negative ﬁelds, and minimal at intermediate ﬁelds, the MO band gap gEbHb is minimal at large positive or negative ﬁelds and maximal at intermediate ﬁelds.
Not surprisingly, when one calculates the Coulomb- corrected excitonic transition energy g i,j+Je,h i,j between the molecular states i and j Fig. 3c one sees a partial cancel- lation for the two low-energy transitions, EbHb and EbHa, leading to a weak dependence of the transition energy on ﬁeld.
In contrast, inspection of Figs. 3a and 3b for the two highest-energy transitions shows that the ﬁeld dependence of g i,j and Je,h i,j reinforce each other, so the excitonic gap g i,j +Je,h i,j Fig. 3c has an ampliﬁed dependence on ﬁeld.
We conclude that the combination of g and Je,h brings the lowest-energy transitions closer to each other, while pushing the two higher-energy transitions apart.
This will affect the correlation coupling between the MO’s, as seen next.
The Coulomb-corrected excitonic transition energies g i,j+Je,h i,j neglect the interactions between the different con- ﬁgurations, i.e., the states from Fig. 3c are not allowed to combine to form more favorable lower-energy correlated states but are artiﬁcially kept as pure EaHa, EaHb, EbHa, or EbHb states.
This mixing of states or interaction of conﬁgu- rations is included in the next step via a conﬁguration inter- action CI Refs.
17 and 18 calculation in which we include all Coulomb and exchange integrals from the ﬁrst four elec- tron and ﬁrst four hole states including spin. The results are shown in Fig. 3d as a function of electric ﬁeld.
The lowest energy transitions excitons 1 and 2 have a very weak dependence on ﬁeld, similarly to the case without correla- tions Fig. 3c. However, in contrast to the perturbative approach of Fig. 3c the states do not cross but anticross at FS max and have slightly lower energy in the intermediate ﬁeld region.
Both of these observations are expected from a correlated picture where the states acquire additional varia- tional freedom through the ability to mix conﬁgurations.
Similarly, the states 3 and 4 anticross at FSPT but in a more abrupt fashion.
The character of the MO states is now mixed in almost the entire region of ﬁelds studied and will be de- scribed in the next section in detail.
V. ANALYSIS OF THE CONFIGURATION INTERACTION RESULTS IN A DOT LOCALIZED PICTURE To understand the correlated CI results we next analyze 1,2,3,4 by decomposing the correlated excitonic states into sums of products of single-dot states eThT, eBhT, eThB, and eBhB called “bidot products” see Ref. 13 for details.
The results of this decomposition are given in Fig. 4 for states 1 to 4 as a function of the electric ﬁeld.
The vertical axis gives the occupation probability of each of the four pos- sible bidot product as a different curve marked with squares, circles, triangles up, and down for eThT, eBhB, eThB, and eBhT, respectively.
For instance, exciton 1 at large positive ﬁeld shows that it has both the character of a one-center exciton or “direct exciton” where both particle reside in the same dot eThT as well as the character of a two-center exciton or “indirect exciton” where both particles reside on different dots eBhT. Figure 5 shows the degree of entangle- ment calculated for the correlated CI wave functions using the von Neumann formula6,20 from Eq. 3. The degree of entanglement is shown as a function of electric ﬁeld for all four excitons as four different curves.
The entanglement shows a broad maximum at FS max for the ﬁrst two excitons 1 and 2 and a sharp maximum at FSPT for the excitons 3 and 4.
When a state is made solely of a single bidot product such as eBhT it is unentangled, but when it is made of a coherent superposition, such as eBhB±eThT, it might be en- tangled.
A. Situation at large ﬁelds In the case of very strong positive ﬁelds the single- particle picture dominates and both Coulomb and correlation FIG.
3. Color online Transition energies for d=7.9 nm as a function of electric ﬁeld in different approximations.
a Single par- ticle transition energies g.
b Direct electron-hole Coulomb matrix elements between MOs Je,h. c Transition energies including electron-hole Coulomb interaction g i,j+Je,h i,j , but without correlation effects.
d Final correlated exciton results.
The bidot products eThT, etc. are given whenever the MO states given on the right are strongly dominated by one of these products.
The position of the single-particle tuning ﬁeld FSPT, where the single-particle wave functions are equally distributed over both dots, and the maximum entanglement ﬁeld FS max are marked in panel c. ELECTRIC-FIELD CONTROL AND OPTICAL… PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-3effects become negligible.
At these ﬁelds, the lowest energy state 1 is purely eBhT, as the ﬁeld pulls the electron to the bottom dot and the hole to the top dot.
Accordingly, the highest energy state 4 is composed of the energetically less favorable conﬁguration, i.e., having the electron in the top dot and the hole in the bottom dot.
This is simply the quan- tum conﬁned Stark effect where the linear term proportional to the permanent electron-hole dipole moment dominates and hence the excitonic energy follows the ﬁeld almost linearly.
The energy of the intermediate states 2,3 have a weak dependence on ﬁeld and are composed of the remaining eThT and eBhB components.
Since our quantum dots are intrinsi- cally not symmetric, the electric ﬁeld at which the state fol- low the pure “high-ﬁeld” regime is different for states 2, 3.
We see that state 2 has already above 10 kV/cm almost pure eBhB character and an almost constant ﬁeld dependence see Fig. 3d while state 3 is still heavily mixed and strongly ﬁeld dependent around 20 kV/cm.
The entangle- ment of the states 1 and 4 at large ﬁelds must be zero because the states are forced into one single conﬁguration either eThB or eBhT.
The exciton states 2 and 3 can, even at very large ﬁelds, form combinations of eThT and eBhB conﬁgurations with nonzero entanglement.
However, any asymmetry between the dots will favor one of these conﬁgu- rations and lower the entanglement of these states.
B. Situation at FSPT where single-particle states are symmetric At zero ﬁeld, the electrons build bonding/anti-bonding combinations but are not fully symmetric/antisymmetric see Fig. 1: localization of the wave function on the top dot is slightly preferred by electrons while the occupation of the bottom dot is preferred by holes the bonding hole state Hb is nearly entirely localized on the bottom dot.
This is mainly because of random alloy ﬂuctuations that make the dots dis- similar a size difference of the dots, as present in most ex- perimental settings, will create additional asymmetry in the molecular orbital.
The holes are mainly localized on the top or the bottom dot with strain favoring the bottom dot Fig. 1.
It is, however, possible to restore the symmetry of the electron and hole states by applying an electric ﬁeld.
At the “single-particle tuning” ﬁeld FSPT 3.6 kV/cm for our dots the symmetry of the electron and hole molecular orbitals is partially restored the hole states remain slightly symmetry broken, see Fig. 1. At this single-particle tuning ﬁeld, FSPT the electron hole states are pulled to the bottom dot, just enough to compensate for the zero-ﬁeld imbalance originat- ing form random alloy ﬂuctuations and strain effects.
In the occupation probabilities of Fig. 4 the two excitons 3 and 4 show a heavy mixture of all conﬁgurations at FSPT.
In Fig. 5 we can see that this combination has a high degree of en- tanglement of around 60%.
However, as we will see in the FIG.
4. Color online Occupation probabilities given as the bidot products eThT or eThB or eBhT and eBhB as a function of the electric ﬁeld for the ﬁrst four exciton states 1 a, 2 b, 3 c, and 4 d for d=7.9 nm. FIG.
5. Color online Entropy of entanglement for the ﬁrst four exciton states as a function of electric ﬁeld applied along the 001 direction.
G. BESTER AND A. ZUNGER PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-4next section, the states 3 and 4 are optically nearly dark at FSPT so that entanglement stored in these states will probably be of less interest.
C. Situation at FS max, where the entanglement is maximized The entanglement of 1 and 2 Fig. 5 reaches its maxi- mum of around 75% at FS max −5.4 kV/cm for our dots. At this ﬁeld the exciton states 1 and 2 are mainly composed of eThT±eBhB conﬁgurations, as shown in Fig. 4, with some contributions from eThB for 1.
The entanglement Fig. 5 as well as the occupation probabilities Fig. 4 for the excitons 1 and 2 change smoothly when the ﬁeld is swept from 0 to −20 kV/cm, making a tuning feasible.
This is in con- trast to the case of high entanglement in 3 and 4 that happens abruptly at FSPT.
Note that in order for the e-h en- tanglement given for 1 and 2 at FS max to be useful in a quantum computation scheme, the qubits need to be physi- cally separated to be addressed individually.
One possibility for such a separation seems to be the use of in plane electric ﬁelds that would coherently drive the electron and hole to different neighboring quantum dots.
This would constitute the next experimental challenge. VI.
CALCULATION OF THE OPTICAL SPECTRUM AND THE OPTICAL SIGNATURE OF ENTANGLEMENT The calculated excitonic states of Fig. 3d are now used to calculate the absorption spectra in Fig. 6.
In Fig. 6 the oscillator strength is plotted for different values of the elec- tric ﬁeld as a function of the transition energy.
The plot shows a total of four transitions marked with 1,2,3,4.
Since the transitions 3 and 4 are weak, their position is marked by solid and open arrows respectively.
Our calcula- tions include the effect of electron-hole exchange that results in the ﬁne-structure of the exciton.22 So each of the four exciton lines is actually a quadruplet split by the very small in the absense of magnetic ﬁeld ﬁne-strucutre splittings.
We do not focus on the ﬁne-structure in the present contribution albeit present in the calculaitons and label the 16 states as four quartets 1,2,3,4.
The transitions 1 and 2 have a weak dependence on ﬁeld and show an anticrossing at FS max.
Transitions 3 and 4 have a strong dependence on ﬁeld and show an anticrossing at FSPT.
The spectra show that at FS max the lowest energy exciton 1 becomes dark and progres- sively gains oscillator strength as the ﬁeld increases away from the anticrossing.
The point of merging of 1 and 2 at the ﬁeld FS max reﬂects a “resonant conditions” with maxi- mum entanglement Fig. 4.
The distinct spectroscopic signal of the anticrossing where the lowest line progressively looses oscillator strength occurs at the point of maximum entanglement and, we suggest, can give experimentalists a simple way to control a delicate quantity such as entangle- ment. VII.
A SIMPLIFIED MODEL FOR THE RESONANT CONDITION OF ENTANGLEMENT The physics underlying the resonant condition, that pro- duces the high degree of entanglement in 1 and 2, is re- vealed in Fig. 7 using the more intuitive basis of dot- FIG. 6.
Oscillator strength of the ﬁrst four transitions ﬁrst 16 transitions including spin as a function of electric ﬁeld.
The single particle tuning ﬁeld FSPT and the ﬁeld of maximum entanglement FSmax are marked.
The arrows are merely a guide to the eye for the weak transitions 3 and 4. FIG.
7. Color online Formation of the highly entangled excitonic states at the critical ﬁeld FS max −5.4 kV/cm. a Single particle electron and hole levels in the dot-localized basis.
b Simple differences between the single particle electron and hole energies from a. c Adding electron-hole direct Coulomb interaction to b. d Adding electron and hole hopping the the levels from c. ELECTRIC-FIELD CONTROL AND OPTICAL… PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-5localized orbitals as opposed to MO’s. To obtain dot- localized orbitals, we rotate the MO’s that are delocalized over both dots until the on-site Coulomb interaction is maximized.21,23 This transformation yields single-particle en- ergies of the dot-localized orbitals, denoted as eT, eB, hT, and hB in Fig. 7a. Figure 7a shows that at FS max the energies of the dot-localized electron and hole orbitals are separated by 10 and 7 meV, respectively, with a gap of 1.3 eV. Gen- erally, the energy separation between eT and eB and between hT and hB can reﬂect size, composition or shape differences of the two dots.
These differences can be tuned by the elec- tric ﬁeld.
Figure 7b shows the energies of simple products of these electron and hole states.
They show two closely spaced levels 3 meV apart in the center of the spectrum and two states 7 meV lower and higher in energy.
These energies are different from the MO’s energies of Fig. 3a that are combinations of eThT, eThB, eBhT, and eBhB at this ﬁeld and have now the true meaning of an electron or hole occupy- ing the top or bottom dot.
In the next step, in Fig. 7c, the two-body Coulomb attraction is taken into account and low- ers the eThT and eBhB states in such a way that they are about 14 meV below the eThB state.
The on-site excitons both par- ticles in the same dot separate from the dissociated excitons electron and hole in different dots in consequence of a weak e-h binding for the dissociated excitons eThB and eBhT. Notably, the simple products eThT and eBhB are energetically nearly degenerate at this level, this is the resonant condition mentioned above.
In the last step, in Fig. 7d, the excitons 1 and 2 are now created by including the effects of elec- tron and hole “hopping” that effectively produce correlated states.
Here it is important to realize that our ﬁnal CI results include all Coulomb and scattering matrix elements and therefore the mechanism labeled here as “tunneling” auto- matically includes the dipole-dipole coupling known as Förster mechanism.
Conceptually, tunneling and Förster cou- pling are different quantities that can be separated but our anticrossing gap includes both.
In Fig. 7d, the excitons 1 and 2 are forming a bonding-like and antibonding-like combination of the energetically degenerate eThT and eBhB states.
The excitons 1 and 2 are now split by a small energy of less than 1 meV.
This small splitting is conceptu- ally very similar to the Davydov splitting24 in molecular crystals.
The analysis also reveals that 1 is anti-symmetric eThT−eBhB and therefore optically dark while 2 is sym- metric eThT+eBhB and optically bright.
The high symmetry of these states purely symmetric and antisymmetric leads to the high degree of entanglement.
Any deviations from FS max will lead to a less symmetric combinations as 1/	2eThT+eBhB with  with lower entanglement and smaller oscillator strength. VIII.
SUMMARY We showed that the degree of electron-hole entanglement in coupled quantum dots can be tuned by an external electric ﬁeld and that the point of maximum entanglement can be identiﬁed by measuring the photoluminescence spectra, ob- serving the merging of two peaks.
This opens ways for ex- perimentalists to identify the electric ﬁeld needed to achieve maximum entanglement in speciﬁc dot molecules.
We ﬁnally analyzed the nature of the excitons and revealed the interplay of single particle effects, direct Coulomb binding and elec- tron and hole hopping on the many body levels.
We de- scribed how these effects conspire to yield a highly en- tangled state.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy SC/BES under the LAB 03-17 initiative.
1D. P. DiVincenzo, Science 270, 255 1995. 2D. Loss and D. P. DiVincenzo, Phys.
Rev. A 57, 120 1998. 3M. Bayer, P. Hawrylak, K. Hinzer, S. Fafard, M. Korkusinski, Z. R. Wasilewski, O. Stern, and A. Forchel, Science 291, 451 2001. 4K. Hinzer, M. Bayer, J. P. McCaffrey, P. Hawrylak, M. Korkusin- ski, O. Stern, Z. R. Wasilewski, S. Fafard, and A. Forchel, Phys.
Status Solidi B 224, 385 2001. 5M. Bayer, G. Ortner, A. Larionov, V. Timofeev, A. Forchel, P. Hawrylak, K. Hinzer, M. Korkusinski, S. Fafard, and Z. Wasilewski, Physica E Amsterdam 12, 900 2002. 6G. Bester, J. Shumway, and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett.
93, 047401 2004. 7P. W. Fry, I. E. Itskevich, D. J. Mowbray, M. S. Sloknick, J. J. Finley, J. A. Barker, E. P. O’Reilly, L. R. Wilson, I. A. Larkin, P. A. Maksym, M. Hopkinson, M. Al-Khafaji, J. P. R. David, A. G. Cullis, G. Hill, and J. C. Clark, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 733 2000. 8I. Shtrichman, C. Metzner, B. D. Gerardot, W. V. Schoenfeld, and P. M. Petroff, Phys.
Rev. B 65, 081303R 2002. 9M. Sugisaki, H. W. Ren, S. V. Nair, K. Nishi, and Y. Masumoto, Phys.
Rev. B 66, 235309 2002. 10B. Alen, F. Bickel, K. Karrai, R. Warburton, and P. Petroff, Appl. Phys. Lett.
83, 2235 2003. 11H. J. Krenner, M. Sabathil, E. C. Clark, A. Kress, D. Schuh, M. Bichler, G. Abstreiter, and J. J. Finley, Phys. Rev. Lett.
94, 057402 2005. 12G. Ortner, M. Bayer, Y. Lyanda-Geller, T. L. Reinecke, A. Kress, J. P. Reithmaier, and A. Forchel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 157401 2005. 13G. Bester, A. Zunger, and J. Shumway, Phys.
Rev. B 71, 075325 2005. 14A. J. Williamson, L.-W. Wang, and A. Zunger, Phys.
Rev. B 62, 12963 2000. 15P. N. Keating, Phys.
Rev. 145, 637 1966. 16L.-W. Wang and A. Zunger, Phys.
Rev. B 59, 15 806 1999. 17A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989. 18A. Franceschetti, H. Fu, L.-W. Wang, and A. Zunger, Phys.
Rev. G. BESTER AND A. ZUNGER PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-6B 60, 1819 1999. 19R. Resta, Phys.
Rev. B 16, 2717 1977. 20C. H. Bennett, H. J. Bernstein, S. Popescu, and B. Schumacher, Phys.
Rev. A 53, 2046 1996. 21L. He, G. Bester, and A. Zunger, cond-mat/0503492, Phys.
Rev. B. to be published. 22G. Bester, S. Nair, and A. Zunger, Phys.
Rev. B 67, 161306R 2003. 23C. Edmiston and K. Ruedenberg, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 35, 457 1963. 24D. P. Craig and S. H. Walmsley, Excitons in Molecular Crystals W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1968. ELECTRIC-FIELD CONTROL AND OPTICAL… PHYSICAL REVIEW B 72, 165334 2005 165334-7