PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) Temperature-controlled interlayer exchange coupling in strong/weak ferromagnetic multilayers: A thermomagnetic Curie switch A. F. Kravets,1,2 A. N. Timoshevskii,2 B. Z. Yanchitsky,2 M. A.
Bergmann,1 J. Buhler,1 S. Andersson,1 and V. Korenivski1,* 1Nanostructure Physics, Royal Institute of Technology, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden 2Institute of Magnetism, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Vernadsky 36 b, 03142 Kiev, Ukraine (Received 28 August 2012; revised manuscript received 12 November 2012; published 14 December 2012) We investigate interlayer exchange coupling based on driving a strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic trilayer through the Curie point of the weakly ferromagnetic spacer, with exchange coupling between the strongly ferromagnetic outer layers that can be switched on and off, or varied continuously in magnitude by controlling the temperature of the material.
We use Ni-Cu alloys of varied composition as the spacer material and model the effects of proximity-induced magnetism and the interlayer exchange coupling through the spacer from ﬁrst principles, taking into account not only thermal spin disorder but also the dependence of the atomic moment of Ni on the nearest-neighbor concentration of the nonmagnetic Cu.
We propose and demonstrate a gradient-composition spacer, with a lower Ni concentration at the interfaces, for greatly improved effective-exchange uniformity and signiﬁcantly improved thermomagnetic switching in the structure.
The reported multilayer materials can form the base for a variety of magnetic devices, such as sensors, oscillators, and memory elements based on thermomagnetic Curie switching.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.86.214413 PACS number(s): 75.20.En, 75.20.Hr, 75.30.Et, 75.70.Cn I. INTRODUCTION Interlayer exchange coupling is one of the key fundamental characteristics of magnetic multilayers,1,2 important for such large-scale industrial applications as ﬁeld sensors, magnetic recording, and magnetic random-access memory.3–6 In many cases it controls the magnetization switching in the system under the inﬂuence of external ﬁelds7 or spin-polarized currents.8–10 The oscillatory interlayer exchange coupling11–13 [Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY)] is due to the conduction electrons mediating the spin transfer between the ferromagnetic layers, and is ﬁxed in fabrication to be positive or negative in magnitude by selecting a suitable thickness of the nonmagnetic metal spacer.
Once the coupling is set to be antiparallel, an external switching ﬁeld is necessary to change the state of the structure to parallel.
It is highly desirable to design multilayer materials where the interlayer exchange coupling is not ﬁxed but rather control- lable, on and off, by varying an external physical parameter, such as temperature.
One such system is a strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic sandwich (F/f/F), where the weakly ferromag- netic spacer (f) has a lower Curie temperature (TC) than that of the strong ferromagnetic outer layers (F).14,15 Heating the structure through the TC of the spacer exchange-decouples the outer magnetic layers, so their parallel alignment below TC can be switched to antiparallel above TC.
This switching is fully reversible on cooling through the TC, as the number of thermal magnons is reduced and the exchange spring in the spacer, aligning the outer F layers, becomes stronger.
This action can provide a spin switch or oscillator with intrinsic thermoelectronic control by the Joule heating of a transport current through the structure.16,17 The key element in such an F/f/F sandwich is the weakly ferromagnetic spacer f, which should have a TC that is tunable in fabrication but well deﬁned in operation, and, preferably, a narrow ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic (P) transition.
Diluted ferromagnetic alloys, such as Ni-Cu, with the TC in the bulk known to be easily tunable to near room temperature,18,19 rep- resent the natural choice for the spacer material.
However, the effects of thermal disorder on the magnetization and exchange coupling in thin-ﬁlm multilayers are practically unexplored.
In particular, the strong exchange at an F/P interface should be expected to suppress the thermal magnons in the spacer, driving the paramagnetic-to-ferromagnetic transition due to the magnetic proximity effect20,21 and, therefore, result in a gradient of the effective magnetization and interatomic exchange in the spacer,22,23 as well as critically affecting the interlayer exchange coupling through the spacer.
In this work we indeed ﬁnd a pronounced ferromagnetic proximity effect at F/f(P) interfaces as well as propose and demonstrate exper- imentally a gradient-spacer design (f∗/f/f∗), with reduced Ni concentration at the interfaces, which signiﬁcantly improves the thermomagnetic switching behavior of the multilayer material, and thereby makes it technologically attractive for applications.
Our choice for the diluted ferromagnetic alloy to be used as the spacer material is Ni-Cu.
It is considered to be a well-known system, at least in the bulk.18,19 Our recent detailed studies of sputter-deposited Ni-Cu ﬁlms24 conﬁrmed the known general properties, but also revealed some peculiar properties, such as exchange-induced phase separation at high Ni concentration x, above 70 at.% Ni, corresponding to the Curie temperature range above 100 ◦C. In this work, the concentration range of interest is x(Ni) < 70 at.%, corre- sponding to the TC range of 100 ◦C and below.
In fact, the Ni-Cu concentrations with x < 50 at.% are nonmagnetic at all temperatures in the bulk18,19 or thick ﬁlms.25 The situation is quite different in thin-ﬁlm multilayers, as we show below.
Perhaps the most informative way to investigate the proper- ties of thin spacers (uniform, f, or gradient, f∗/f/f∗) as it relates to the interlayer exchange is to integrate them into asymmetric trilayers, AF/F/spacer/F, where one of the outer strongly ferromagnetic layers, F, is pinned by an antiferromagnet AF and study the coupling and decoupling of the outer strongly ferromagnetic layers as a function of the spacer composition, thickness, and temperature.
The method is not direct as to 214413-1 1098-0121/2012/86(21)/214413(7) ©2012 American Physical SocietyA. F. KRAVETS et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) measuring the magnetization in the spacer, but is very sensitive and direct when it comes to the exchange interaction of interest. II.
METHODS Our speciﬁc material combinations are based on uniform NixCu100−x (t nm) and gradient NixCu100−x(t nm)/Ni72Cu28 (6 nm)/NixCu100−x(t nm) spacers [uniform spacer (us) and gradient spacer (gs), respectively], enclosed by one exchange-pinned and one free Permalloy (Ni80Fe20, Py) layer: speciﬁcally, Ir20Mn80(12 nm)/Co90Fe10(2 nm)/Py (2 nm)/ us (or gs)/Py (5 nm), hereinafter Fpin/NixCu100−x(t nm)/F or Fpin/gs/F, respectively.
The 2-nm-thick Co-Fe layer is used to improve the pinning at the IrMn/Py interface and does not inﬂuence the thermomagnetic transition in the spacer.
The multilayer ﬁlms were deposited at room temperature on thermally oxidized Si substrates by dc-magnetron sputtering using an AJA Orion multitarget sputtering system.
The base pressure in the deposition chamber was ∼5 × 10−8 Torr and the Ar pressure used during deposition was 5 mTorr.
Films of diluted ferromagnetic NixCu100−x alloys of varied composition of 60 nm in thickness were deposited using cosputtering from Ni and Cu targets.
The composition of the NixCu100−x ﬁlms was controlled by setting the corresponding deposition rates of the individual Ni and Cu components, with relevant calibrations obtained by subsequent thickness proﬁlometry and energy-dispersive x-ray analysis.
The magnetic measurements were performed using a vibrating-sample magnetometer in the temperature range of 20–100 ◦C. Magnetic ﬁeld was applied in the ﬁlm plane, along the AF pinning axis.
First-principles calculations of magnetic properties of the spacers in the exchange-coupled multilayers were performed under the assumption that our model system is a Ni/Ni-Cu/Ni trilayer, in which, for purpose of simplicity, the diluted magnetic alloy spacer is enclosed by bulklike fcc Ni [001] (for making the calculations time efﬁcient; qualitatively the same behavior is obtained with Permalloy).
Both Ni and Cu atoms in the three-layer structure occupy the sites of the fcc lattice and are distributed randomly within each monolayer in the spacer.
The number of atomic monolayers in the spacer is denoted by Nf.
The atomic concentration of Ni in the ith monolayer is denoted by ci.
The Ni atoms interact magnetically by the standard isotropic Heisenberg interaction.
Cu-Cu and Ni-Cu exchange interactions are neglected since the magnetic moment of Cu is negligible (Cu does not polarize in Ni).
The local atomic magnetic moment of Ni, mloc(z), is a function of the number of the nearest-neighbor Ni atoms, z.
For obtaining the effective (measurable) magnetic characteristics of the structure we use the mean-ﬁeld model and take the average Ni magnetic moment to be the same within one monolayer, mi = m(zi).
The effective magnetic ﬁeld is26 Hi = −  j Jjni+jci+jmi+j, (1) where the sum is over monolayers, Ji is the Ni-Ni exchange interaction, and ni is the coordination number.
The magnetization as a function of temperature was cal- culated using the mean-ﬁeld approximation for a lattice-type Hamiltonian, with the standard isotropic Heisenberg exchange interaction between the nickel atoms at sites i,j: Jijmimj.
Tak- ing into account the quasi-one-dimensionality of the problem, all nickel atoms within each atomic monolayer were taken to have the same magnetic moment, such that the exchange and magnetization varied only along the thickness.
For a given temperature T , the magnetization of each monolayer is obtained as a solution of the system of nonlinear equations26 mi = L(miHi/kBT ), where L(x) is the Langevin function, Hi is the effective magnetic ﬁeld on the ith nickel site, and kB is the Boltzmann constant.
In this, we include the ab initio dependence of the magnitude of the local Ni atomic magnetic moment |m| = mloc on the nearest-neighbor Cu concentration.
The unknown exchange integrals Ji were obtained for two coordination spheres of the fcc lattice.
In this, the total energies of three superstructures of fcc Ni were calculated for the ferro- magnetic (F), antiferromagnetic (AF), and antiferromagnetic double27 (AFD) layer types of magnetic ordering.
With the magnetic energy in the Heisenberg form and assuming the magnetic moment of Ni independent of its direction, the following expressions for the exchange interac- tion are obtained: J1 = (EF −EAF)/8 and J2 = (EF + EAF − 2EAFD)/4, where EF, EAF, and EAFD are the full energies of the superstructures.
The total energies of the structures were obtained using the density functional theory approach and the WIEN2K full- potential linearized augmented plane-wave (FLAPW) code.28 The generalized gradient approximation exchange-correlation potential was the same as in Ref. 29.
The radius of the mufﬁn-tin spheres was 2.2 atomic length units.
The electron density was computed for 63 k points in the irreducible parts of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone.
The obtained exchange integrals were J1 = −6.15 meV and J2 = −17.01 meV. III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. NixCu100−x ﬁlms Figure 1 shows the saturation magnetization of 60-nm- thick NixCu100−x ﬁlms of varied composition normalized to the saturation magnetization of pure Ni.
The magnetization vanishes at room temperature for x ≈62 at.%, where the Ni- Cu becomes paramagnetic in the bulk limit (here a single layer 60 nm thick).
Figure 1 also shows the saturation magnetization measured at 100 ◦C, which vanishes at x ≈70 at.%.
The ratio of the magnetization at these two temperatures, shown by the triangle symbols in Fig. 1, has a sharp step at 70–74 at.% Ni, suggesting the optimal composition interval for exploiting the ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic transition in the Ni-Cu alloy ﬁlms.
We show, however, that this composition range must be signiﬁcantly shifted to lower effective nickel concentrations, if the Ni-Cu spacers are to have sharp thermal transitions in thin-ﬁlm multilayers.
B. Fpin/NixCu100−x(t nm)/F trilayers Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5 show the key magnetic parameters of the Fpin/NixCu100−x(t nm)/F multilayers, measured at room temperature (RT), with the magnetization for the soft F layers 214413-2TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED INTERLAYER EXCHANGE . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) FIG.
1. (Color online) Normalized saturation magnetization of NixCu100−x ﬁlms as a function of Ni concentration, measured at room temperature (RT) and 100 ◦C. Triangle symbols show the ratio of the magnetization at the two temperatures, which becomes zero at the boundary of the thermomagnetic operating region.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
always in the ﬁlm plane and the external in-plane ﬁeld applied along the AF-pinning axis.
Figure 2 shows magnetization loops for the NixCu100−x spacer thickness of 6 nm and x varied in the range from 0 to 72 at.%.
For low Ni concentrations (x < 35 at.%), due to the absence of any signiﬁcant magnetic coupling between the free and pinned F layers through the spacer, the magnetization loop consists of two well-separated transitions at approximately zero ﬁeld and −480 Oe (Fig. 2, green), corresponding to switching of the free Py layer and the pinned ferromagnetic layer, respectively.
These loops were separately conﬁrmed to exactly correspond to measured single- layer Py (zero ﬁeld offset) and a pinned layer of CoFe/NiFe (≈−500 Oe offset).
With increasing Ni concentration past x ≈35 at.%, the minor and major loops begin to merge (Fig. 2, blue), indicating an enhanced exchange coupling FIG.
2. (Color online) Magnetization loops of Fpin/NixCu100−x (6 nm)/F trilayers with spacers having 35, 52, and 70 Ni at.% content.
The exchange ﬁelds Hex1 and Hex2 for the free, F, and pinned, Fpin, ferromagnetic layers are deﬁned as the midpoints of the respective transitions. FIG.
3. (Color online) Magnetization minor loops of Fpin/NixCu100−x(6 nm)/F trilayers with different Ni-Cu spacer compositions.
between the free and pinned outer layers.
The middle points of the two magnetization transitions (minor and major) deﬁne the two exchange ﬁelds Hex1 and Hex2, respectively.
As the spacer becomes fully nonmagnetic at low Ni concentrations and does not mediate any exchange coupling, the unpinned Py layer becomes free to switch and Hex1 →0, while Hex2 characterizes solely the strength of the AF pinning of the other ferromagnetic layer.
Already at x ≈52 at.%, the two transitions merge signiﬁcantly, indicating a substantial exchange coupling across the spacer.
Interestingly, the x = 52 at.% composition for single-layer Ni-Cu is nonmagnetic (paramagnetic) at room temperature (TC ≈10 K) and normally would not be expected to exchange-couple the outer F layers.
These data indicate that a ferromagnetic order of signiﬁcant strength is induced in the paramagnetic spacer on rather long length scales, several nanometers in this case.
This induced ferromagnetism couples the outer layers, bringing together the two magnetic transitions, such that Hex1 and Hex2 merge.
Thus, for this geometry, Hex1 FIG. 4. (Color online) Exchange ﬁelds of the two outer ferromag- netic layers vs nickel concentration in a 6-nm-thick Ni-Cu spacer.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
214413-3A. F. KRAVETS et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) FIG.
5. (Color online) Exchange ﬁelds of the two outer ferro- magnetic layers vs thickness of the Ni-Cu spacer for x = 56 at.% The solid lines are guides to the eye.
is a direct measure of the interlayer exchange coupling, while Hex2 additionally reﬂects the strength of the antiferromagnetic pinning.
For x > 70 at.%, a bulk composition ferromagnetic at room temperature, minor and major loops merge into one (Fig. 2, red).
Fine-stepping through the low-concentration range, illustrated by the minor loops in Fig. 3, shows that the onset of the interlayer exchange is at x ≈35 at.%, which is due to the vanishing Ni atomic magnetic moment in the Cu matrix, as detailed below.
The dependence of the two exchange ﬁelds Hex1 and Hex2 on the Ni concentration in a 6-nm-thick Ni-Cu spacer is shown in Fig. 4.
The free and pinned ferromagnetic layers are fully decoupled up to x = 35 at.% (red symbols), at which point Hex1 begins to increase in magnitude, ﬁrst slightly and then substantially above 50 at.%, even though the spacer is still in- trinsically paramagnetic at this concentration.
At x ≈70 at.% the two exchange ﬁelds merge into one (see Fig. 4, showing full coupling, which is expected since the spacer is intrinsically ferromagnetic at 70 at.% at RT.
Figure 5 shows the thickness dependence of the exchange ﬁelds for a nominally (in the bulk) paramagnetic spacer composition of x = 56 at.%.
One can see that at 3 nm thickness the outer ferromagnetic layers are fully coupled and behave as one.
For this composition, the interlayer exchange vanishes at approximately 9 nm in the spacer thickness.
This is much greater than the interatomic spacing normally associated with direct exchange and indicates that the characteristic length scale for the induced ferromagnetic proximity effect under study is dictated by another mechanism, namely, thermally disordered lattice spins in the spacer by short-wave spin waves on length scales of at least several lattice units.
C. First-principles calculations In order to understand the mechanism involved as well as optimize the performance of the material we develop a full model of the F/f(P)/F multilayer from ﬁrst principles, which takes into account the thermal spin disorder as well as the FIG.
6. (Color online) Calculated local atomic magnetic moment of Ni atoms in NixCu100−x alloys as a function of the number of the Ni atoms in the ﬁrst coordination sphere, normalized to the moment of bulk fcc Ni of m0(Ni) = 0.63μB.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
Inset shows the calculated and experimental (Ref. 19) slopes of TC in the bulk.
effect of Cu dilution on the atomic magnetic moment of Ni in the performance-critical spacer layer.
For obtaining the dependence of the local atomic magnetic moment of Ni, mloc(z), on the number of the nearest-neighbor Ni atoms, z, the electronic structure of three special quasir- andom superstructures,30 which model random bulk Ni-Cu alloys, was calculated.
The stoichiometries of the structures were Ni25Cu75, Ni50Cu50, Ni75Cu25.
Figure 6 (solid circles) shows values of mloc calculated by the FLAPW method.
For calibration purposes, the slope of the Curie temperature of bulk Ni-Cu alloy was calculated and agreed well with the experiment,19 as shown in the inset to Fig. 6.
The interesting result in the obtained mloc(z) is that Ni becomes essentially nonmagnetic (diamagnetic) in the Ni-Cu alloy at a concentration of approximately 30 at.% Ni.
This has important implications for optimizing the spacer material, as discussed below.
The key for efﬁcient operation of a spin-thermoelectronic valve is the small width of its Curie transition.
The green line in Fig. 7 shows the calculated magnetization per Ni atom of bulk Ni80Cu20 alloy.
Blue and red colored data points show the calculated magnetization of the uniform (us) and gradient (gs) spacers as a function of temperature.
Spacers are composed of 38 monolayers (approx.
7 nm) and placed between the plates of fcc Ni.
At T = 0 K the magnetization is equal to the local moment of the Ni atom mloc for this composition (Fig. 6).
When the spacer is enclosed by strongly ferromagnetic outer electrodes (Ni), the ferromagnetic state becomes greatly extended in temperature, vanishing completely only above 0.9TC(Ni), as shown by the blue curve in Fig. 7.
This means that the outer electrodes are strongly coupled at the nominal TC of the spacer alloy (0.58), marked as the inﬂection point Mt(Tt).
The effective transition extends over the broad interval of 0.3TC(Ni)–0.4TC(Ni).
The reason for this extended transition is the strong ferromagnetic order induced in the spacer in 214413-4TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED INTERLAYER EXCHANGE . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) FIG.
7. (Color online) Calculated magnetization per nickel atom versus temperature for a bulk Ni80Cu20 alloy (green), uniform Ni80Cu20 (7 nm) (us, blue) and gradient Ni65Cu35(1 nm)/Ni84Cu16 (5 nm)/Ni65Cu35(1 nm) (gs, red) composition spacers enclosed by outer Ni layers.
The inﬂection points, where the transition is steepest, as deﬁned by the second derivative changing sign, are marked with Mt(Tt).
proximity to the interfaces, as shown in Fig. 8 with the open symbols, for two characteristic temperatures.
At Tt the moment at the interface is enhanced fourfold compared to that in the center of the spacer, with a similar variation in the effective exchange and TC across the thickness.
The proximity length is an order of magnitude greater than the atomic spacing, so the induced magnetization penetrates all through the spacer thickness.
The result is nonzero magnetic exchange between the outer ferromagnetic layers well above the intrinsic Curie point of the spacer material.
This proximity effect should be FIG.
8. (Color online) Calculated magnetization proﬁles in uni- form Ni80Cu20(38 ML) (us, open symbols) and gradient Ni65Cu35 (4 ML)/Ni84Cu16(30 ML)/Ni65Cu35(4 ML) (gs, solid symbols) com- position spacers for two different temperatures near the respective Curie points.
ML indicates a monolayer. FIG. 9.
(Color online) Thickness of the interfacial buffer layer f∗of the weakly ferromagnetic spacer at which the outer Py layers decouple, as a function of its Ni content, for room temperature and 100 ◦C. The thickness and Ni concentration of the inner spacer layer f are 6 nm and 72 at.%, respectively.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
universal for the F/f interface and sets a fundamental limitation on the width of the Curie transition of the weak ferromagnet incorporated in the multilayer.
It is highly desirable for device applications to narrow the magnetic transition in the spacer.
Using the above detailed understanding of the highly nonuniform magnetization proﬁle at F/f interfaces, we have designed a gradient-spacer design, in which the magnetic-atom concentration is reduced at the interfaces.
This efﬁciently suppresses the proximity effect and makes the magnetization distribution much more uniform, as shown in Fig. 8, with solid symbols denoting a gradient spacer with the interface Ni concentration reduced from 80 to 65 at.%.
This change in the spacer layout has a dramatic effect on the simulated transition width, as shown in Fig. 7 (red).
The magnetization at the inﬂection point is ﬁve times smaller for the gradient-spacer design, which translates into an order of magnitude sharper Curie transition for the trilayer, comparable in width with that for the ideal spacer (uniform, bulklike; green in Fig. 7).
D. Gradient spacer In order to experimentally demonstrate the gradient-spacer effect proposed above, we have fabricated a range of valves, in which the spacer itself had a tri-layer structure f∗/f/f∗, with the buffer layers f∗of different thickness and Ni content compared to the inner spacer layer f.
The inner layer f had a ﬁxed thickness and concentration of 6 nm and 72 at.%, respectively.
This new layout is illustrated in the inset to Fig. 9, which shows the phase map of the resulting proximity effect.
The vertical scale gives the thickness of the buffer layer f∗for a given temperature, at which the outer Py layers fully decouple, determined in the same fashion as in Fig. 2.
The phase map thus gives the operating region for a Curie valve based on the gradient-spacer design.
214413-5A. F. KRAVETS et al. PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) FIG. 10.
(Color online) Normalized magnetization of two uni- form Ni72Cu28 spacer multilayers, with spacers 10 (us1) and 20 (us2) nm thick, and a gradient Ni50Cu50(4 nm)/Ni72Cu28(6 nm)/Ni50Cu50 (4 nm) spacer (gs) multilayer.
The solid lines are guides to the eye.
The arrows in the illustrations of the right panel show the respective relative orientations of the magnetic moments in the center of the in- dividual layers of the exchange-coupled Fpin/us(orgs)/F multilayer.
Interestingly, the scaling is logarithmic and shows that the thinnest layers decouple only below x = 30 at.%, where the Ni atoms become, in fact, nonmagnetic.
We believe that this ﬁnd- ing has high relevance for the RKKY interaction in this system in the thin-spacer limit studied previously experimentally31,32 and theoretically.33 The RKKY interlayer coupling through thin Cu spacers was interpreted to withstand paramagnetic Ni impurities up to approximately 35 at.% Ni, vanishing at higher concentrations.
We suggest that the mechanism behind the strong RKKY coupling and its subsequent vanishing at higher Ni content was instead the loss of the atomic moment on Ni below 30 at.% Ni in Cu, detailed in our simulation results above (Fig. 6).
Having established the key physical parameters of the gradient-spacer design, below we demonstrate its greatly improved thermomagnetic characteristics.
Figure 10 compares the temperature dependence of the magnetization of the two spacer layouts, with uniform and gradient-type composition.
The samples were heated to 100 ◦C (to just above the bulk TC of the inner spacer material, but below any signiﬁcant reduction in the AF pinning), after which a reversing ﬁeld bias Hb of −50 Oe was applied in the ﬁlm plane opposite to the pinning direction (illustrated in Fig. 10), and the temperature was gradually decreased to room temperature while the magnetization was recorded.
As a result, the spacer acts as an exchange spring of increasing strength, which rotates the free Py layer during the cooling from being along the biasing ﬁeld toward the pinning direction.
The Curie transition (paramagnetic to ferromagnetic) is very broad in the uniform-spacer multilayer.
In fact, the rotation of the free layer is far from complete at 100 ◦C, even for the relatively very thick spacer (20 nm), due to the residual proximity-induced interlayer exchange.
In stark contrast, the gradient-spacer sample fully exchange-decouples into the antiparallel state of the outer Py layers at 90 ◦C (the Curie point of the inner spacer material with x = 72 at.%), and has a sharp transition into the parallel state of the multilayer on lowering temperature.
The 20%–80% width of the transition is approximately 20 ◦C, the same as the full width at half maximum, and several times narrower than that for the uniform spacer.
This result is in good agreement with the theoretically predicted behavior.
It is informative to note that the thermomagnetic switching demonstrated herein can have signiﬁcant advantages over the recently developed and very promising thermally assisted switching, used in the memory technology based on thermal control of the antiferromagnetic exchange pinning.34 One advantage is that the Curie point of a diluted ferromagnet can be easily varied in the desired range and is not ﬁxed to the N´eel (or blocking) temperature of the antiferromagnet.
Further- more, the ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic transition typically is fully reversible and does not involve spin “blocking,” and therefore should not suffer from training effects present at the exchange-biased F/AF interface. IV.
CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, we have investigated strong/weak/strong ferromagnetic trilayers where the interlayer exchange coupling is controlled by driving the material through the Curie point of the spacer.
The resulting exchange coupling between the strongly ferromagnetic outer layers can be switched on and off, or varied continuously in magnitude by controlling the temperature of the material.
This effect is explained theoretically as due to induced ferromagnetism at F/f(P) interfaces.
It is shown that the atomic magnetic moment and the effective interatomic exchange coupling are highly nonuni- form throughout the spacer thickness, especially in proximity to the strongly ferromagnetic interfaces.
This critically affects the interlayer exchange coupling and the ability to control it thermoelectronically.
We have proposed and demonstrated a gradient-type spacer having a signiﬁcantly narrower Curie transition and distinct thermomagnetic switching.
The demon- strated multilayer material can form the base for a variety of magnetic devices based on spin-thermoelectronic switching.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from EU-FP7- FET-Open through Project Spin-Thermo-Electronics.
*Corresponding author: vk@kth.se 1S. S. P. Parkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3598 (1991).
2A. Fert, P. Gr¨unberg, A. Barth´el´emy, F. Petroff, and W. Zinn, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 140–144, 1 (1995).
3G. A. Prinz, Science 282, 1660 (1998).
4U. Hartmann, Magnetic Multilayers and Giant Magnetoresistance: Fundamentals and Industrial Applications (Springer, Berlin, 1999).
5P. Gr¨unberg, Phys.
Today 54(5), 31 (2001).
214413-6TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED INTERLAYER EXCHANGE . . .
PHYSICAL REVIEW B 86, 214413 (2012) 6C. Chappert, A. Fert, and F. Nguyen Van Dau, Nat. Mater. 6, 813 (2007).
7J. M. Daughton, J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 192, 334 (1999).
8J. S. Slonczewski, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 159, L1 (1996).
9E. B. Myers, D. C. Ralph, J. A. Katine, R. N. Louie, and R. A. Buhrman, Science 285, 867 (1999).
10A. Brataas, A. D. Kent, and H. Ohno, Nat. Mater. 11, 372 (2012).
11P. Gr¨unberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, M. B. Brodsky, and H. Sowers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2442 (1986).
12G. Binasch, P. Gr¨unberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn, Phys.
Rev. B 39, 4828 (1989).
13M. N. Baibich, J. M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen Van Dau, F. Petroff, P. Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2472 (1988).
14S. Andersson and V. Korenivski, IEEE Trans.
Magn. 46, 2140 (2010).
15S. Andersson and V. Korenivski, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 09D711 (2010).
16A. M. Kadigrobov, S. Andersson, D. Radi´c, R. I. Shekhter, M. Jonson, and V. Korenivski, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 123706 (2010).
17A. M. Kadigrobov, S. Andersson, Hee Chul Park, D. Radi´c, R. I. Shekhter, M. Jonson, and V. Korenivski, J. Appl.
Phys. 111, 044315 (2012).
18C. G. Robbins, H. Claus, and P. A. Beck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 1307 (1969).
19D. J. Chakrabarti, D. E. Laughlin, S. W. Chen, and Y. A. Chang, in Phase Diagrams of Binary Copper Alloys, edited by P. Subramanian, D. Chakrabarti, and D. Laughlin (ASM Interna- tional, Materials Park, OH, 1994), p. 276.
20J. J. Hauser, Phys.
Rev. 187, 580 (1969).
21M. G. Samant, J. St¨ohr, S. S. P. Parkin, G. A. Held, B. D. Hermsmeier, F. Herman, M. van Schilfgaarde, L.-C. Duda, D. C. Mancini, N. Wassdahl, and R. Nakajima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1112 (1994).
22N. Garc´ıa and A. Hernando, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 99, L12 (1991).
23I. Navarro, M. Ortuno, and A. Hernando, Phys.
Rev. B 53, 11656 (1996).
24A. F. Kravets, A. N. Timoshevskii, B. Z. Yanchitsky, O. Yu.
Salyuk, S. O. Yablonovskii, S. Andersson, and V. Korenivski, J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
324, 2131 (2012); see also M. J. Fesharaki, L. P´eter, T. Schucknecht, D. Rafaja, J. D´egi, L. Pog´any, K. Neur´ohr, ´E. Sz´eles, G. Nabiyouni, and I. Bakonyi, J. Electrochem.
Soc. 159, D162 (2012) for a discussion of phase separation in electrodeposited Ni-Cu ﬁlms.
25I. Bakonyi, E. T´oth-K´ad´ar, J. T´oth, T. Becsei, T. Tarn´oczi, and P. Kamasa, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 11, 963 (1999).
26R. E. Camley and D. R. Tilley, Phys.
Rev. B 37, 3413 (1988).
27H. C. Herper, E. Hoffmann, and P. Entel, Phys.
Rev. B 60, 3839 (1999).
28P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G. Madsen, D. Kvasnicka, and J. Luitz, computer code WIEN2K (An Augmented Plane Wave + Local Orbitals Program for Calculating Crystal Properties) (Karlheinz Schwarz, Techn. Universit¨at Wien, Austria, 2001).
29J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).
30S. L. Shang, Y. Wang, D. E. Kim, C. L. Zacherl, Y. Du, and Z. K. Liu, Phys.
Rev. B 83, 144204 (2011).
31S. N. Okuno and K. Inomata, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1711 (1993).
32S. S. P. Parkin, C. Chappert, and F. Hermann, Europhys. Lett. 24, 71 (1993).
33N. N. Lathiotakis, B. L. Gy¨orffy, E. Bruno, and B. Ginatempo, Phys.
Rev. B 62, 9005 (2000); N. N. Lathiotakis, B. L. Gy¨orffy, and J. B. Staunton, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 10, 10357 (1998); N. N. Lathiotakis, B. L. Gy¨orffy, J. B. Staunton, and B. ´Ujfalussy, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 185, 293 (1998).
34I. L. Prejbeanu, M. Kerekes, R. C. Sousa, H. Sibuet, O. Redon, B. Dieny, and J. P. Nozi`eres, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 19, 165218 (2007). 214413-7