 View Online  Export Citation RESEARCH ARTICLE |  JULY 06 2023 Simulation study of the effects of polymer network dynamics and mesh confinement on the diffusion and structural relaxation of penetrants  Tsai-Wei Lin   ; Baicheng Mei   ; Kenneth S. Schweizer   ; Charles E. Sing   J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0148247  CHORUS Articles You May Be Interested In Self-consistent hopping theory of activated relaxation and diffusion of dilute penetrants in dense crosslinked polymer networks J. Chem. Phys.
(May 2023) Effect of penetrant–polymer interactions and shape on the motion of molecular penetrants in dense polymer networks J. Chem. Phys.
(March 2024) Propensity rules in rotationally inelastic polar molecule collisions involving 2Σ+ molecules: CaCl(X  2Σ+)– CH3Cl J. Chem. Phys.
(October 1984)  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp Simulation study of the effects of polymer network dynamics and mesh confinement on the diffusion and structural relaxation of penetrants Cite as: J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 Submitted: 28 February 2023 • Accepted: 12 June 2023 • Published Online: 6 July 2023 Tsai-Wei Lin,1,2 Baicheng Mei,2,3 Kenneth S. Schweizer,1,2,3 and Charles E. Sing1,2,a) AFFILIATIONS 1 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA 2Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA 3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: cesing@illinois.edu ABSTRACT The diffusion of small molecular penetrants through polymeric materials represents an important fundamental problem, relevant to the design of materials for applications such as coatings and membranes.
Polymer networks hold promise in these applications because dramatic differences in molecular diffusion can result from subtle changes in the network structure.
In this paper, we use molecular simulation to understand the role that cross-linked network polymers have in governing the molecular motion of penetrants.
By considering the local, activated alpha relaxation time of the penetrant and its long-time diffusive dynamics, we can determine the relative importance of activated glassy dynamics on penetrants at the segmental scale vs entropic mesh confinement on penetrant diffusion.
We vary several parameters, such as the cross-linking density, temperature, and penetrant size, to show that cross-links primarily affect molecular diffusion through the modification of the matrix glass transition, with local penetrant hopping at least partially coupled to the segmental relaxation of the polymer network.
This coupling is very sensitive to the local activated segmental dynamics of the surrounding matrix, and we also show that penetrant transport is affected by dynamic heterogeneity at low temperatures.
To contrast, only at high temperatures and for large penetrants or when the dynamic heterogeneity effect is weak, does the effect of mesh confinement become significant, even though penetrant diffusion more broadly empirically follows similar trends as established models of mesh confinement-based transport.
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0148247 INTRODUCTION The diffusive transport of molecular species through poly- mers is an important fundamental problem, with the motion of small “penetrants” being integral to the design of polymer materi- als for a variety of applications.
For example, barrier coatings,1–3 drug delivery vehicles,4,5 and self-healing microcapsules1,2,6 may be engineered to impede the transport of penetrants, while mem- branes are often designed to selectively separate or filter specific small penetrants (e.g., gas,7–10 water,11–13 or organic molecules14,15).
Membrane separations represent an especially important materials design challenge7,15 due to significant interest in finding promis- ing alternatives to distillation for chemical separations.
One strategy is to impose control over pore size in materials such as zeolites,16 metal organic frameworks,17,18 and covalent organic frameworks;19 however, these materials have issues with mechanical properties and scalability.16–19 If the molecular penetrants are especially small, such as in gas separations, then glassy amorphous polymers can be another option for membranes.8–10 These materials are more mechanically robust, but despite important insights from atomistic simulations and phenomenological models,20–23 they are limited to small gas molecules and do not have the same size-selectivity as more precise matrix structures.8–10 Highly cross-linked networks have recently emerged as a promising option for the selective transport of small molecules,24–26 exploiting the sensitivity of penetrant diffusion to the near-T g cou- pling between the structural relaxation of the dense molecular mesh and activated hopping processes.
This is motivated by experimental support for the premise that, despite significant molecular disor- der, dense polymer networks can discern small changes in penetrant size and interactions.25 The design of cross-linked networks for selective transport requires an understanding of how the molecular- J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-1 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp scale dynamics of penetrant and matrix relaxation contribute to large-scale diffusive motion.
Aspects of this problem have been stud- ied in the literature.
For example, there has been extensive work on studying particle transport through polymer solutions or high- temperature networks,27–34 which is understood to be governed by a confinement parameter C = d/ax that relates the penetrant size d to the size of the network mesh ax.
This parameter quantifies the extent to which the surrounding polymer matrix sterically “traps” the par- ticle such that the particle diffusion is an activated process where the network strands must entropically stretch to allow the particle to hop out of its location within the mesh.27 Several expressions for the diffusion constant have been considered in the literature, such as the expression proposed by Cai et al.,27 Dp ∼d2 τ C−1 exp (−bC2) = d2 τ X.
(1) This relates the diffusion constant Dp to the confinement parameter C, a length scale characterized by the penetrant size d, a timescale τ that Cai et al. identified as the Rouse time of the network strand, and a constant b of order unity.27 While there are other candi- date models,30 these still exhibit a general form given in the second equivalence of Eq. (1) as the product of two factors: a quantity pro- portional to the elementary particle diffusion constant d2/τ and a factor X dictated by the network mesh and related to C (in the case above, X = exp(−bC2)/C, though other candidate forms for X work similarly well to describe data28,30,35,36).
Simulations of large penetrants in rubbery networks are consistent with this physical picture;28,29,37 however, the choice of τ can become non-trivial as temperature is lowered for polymer melts and/or when the glass transition is approached.38 For example, in uncross-linked systems, activated transport of penetrants becomes dominated by molec- ular caging and correlated matrix elasticity effects near the glass transition.38–41 For tight and supercooled near-T g networks, the physical rela- tionship in Eq. (1) is complicated by recent experimental, simula- tion, and theoretical investigations by the authors and collaborators, demonstrating that the structural relaxation in polymer networks is strongly dependent on the extent of cross-linking, manifesting as a monotonic increase in the material T g with cross-link den- sity.42 In this case, the timescale τ in Eq. (1) is expected to depend on molecular penetrant caging, which itself will be sensitive to the confinement parameter C due to its relationship with the cross- link density of the polymer network.
Cross-links could thus impact penetrant motion both by affecting the structural relaxation of the surrounding network and providing a confining mesh that obstructs penetrant motion.
Our recent work demonstrated using a com- bination of theory, experiment, and simulation that there exists a degeneracy of interpretations for cross-link effects on penetrant transport between these two mechanisms, noting the need to further clarify the molecular origin of this observation.35 In this article, we use computer simulation to study the diffu- sion and structural relaxation of penetrants in dense, highly cross- linked polymer networks in the computationally accessible weakly supercooled regime.
Simulation will allow us to separate out the different ways that cross-links contribute to penetrant diffusion by quantifying both the overall diffusion constant Dp and the character- istic timescale of penetrant hopping τ in Eq. (1), which we identify with a penetrant alpha relaxation time τα,p determined from an appropriate time correlation function as discussed below.
By relat- ing particle hopping events to long-time diffusive motion, we can study how these properties are affected by both cross-linking frac- tion and temperature.
We determine that (1) supercooled networks exhibit strong coupling between the network segmental relaxation and penetrant hopping, with sensitivity to the cross-linking depen- dent T g; (2) increasing temperature can lead to slower diffusion at given T g/T due to the dependence of T g on cross-link density, but this is mostly attributed to a non-trivial T dependence of how local polymer relaxations couple to penetrant motion; (3) the cou- pling between penetrant motion and polymer relaxation processes is dependent on penetrant size d; and (4) penetrant hopping is correlated with long-time diffusion at several values of T g/T near T = T g, but the mesh confinement only becomes apparent at high T and for large penetrants.
This all leads to the overall insight that, under typical conditions for polymer networks and molecu- lar penetrants, cross-linking primarily affects penetrant transport by changing the effective T g and segmental relaxation time of the sur- rounding matrix and only secondarily through mesh confinement.
Serendipitously, this still manifests in a similar relationship between the diffusion constants Dp and C that is consistent with the form in Eq. (1).27,30 These molecular-level insights into penetrant diffusion and hopping clarify the fundamental mechanisms governing pene- trant transport and help identify ways in which both temperature and network architecture can be used to engineer selectivity into a promising class of membrane materials.
We also briefly discuss at a high level how the theoretical results in our companion paper36 qualitatively compare to our present sim- ulations.
The goal is not to quantitatively use simulation to test the theory, especially since the polymer and penetrant models, and range of temperatures explored, are not the same.
Rather, the present work and the theoretical companion paper are meant to be com- plementary with regard to addressing the scientific problems of interest.
SIMULATION METHODS We use coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations (MD) to model the diffusion of spherical penetrants in cross-linked poly- mer networks43 using well-established methods for studying poly- mers near the glass transition.44–47 Our system is initially composed of Nc = 20 linear chains with Nm = 30 beads each with diameter σ, modeled as standard semiflexible chains.
We show in Fig. S1 that our simulations are sufficiently large to not exhibit system size effects.
These beads are placed in a cubic box with periodic boundary con- ditions in three dimensions, along with Np spherical penetrants of diameter ˜d.
The number of penetrants Np depends on ˜d and is chosen so that the volume fraction of the penetrant ϕp = πd3Np 6V is kept below ϕp = 0.01 to ensure that the addition of penetrants will not affect network dynamics and to prevent significant interactions between penetrant molecules.
Standard dimensionless simulation quantities are employed43,48 and denoted with tildes (e.g., ˜T = T/T∗).
Quan- tities are rendered dimensionless by several characteristic values: lengths are related to the bead diameter σ, energies are related to the thermal energy at a reference temperature kBT∗, and times are J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-2 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp related to a timescale τ∗= √ mσ2/kBT∗, where m is the monomer mass.
The characteristic temperature T∗corresponds to 485 K, which is determined from parameterization against experiments,42 using cross-linked poly(n-butyl acrylate) (PnBA) as a representative polymer that has been studied by our experimental collaborators (see details in Ref. 35).
Our MD simulations consider standard potentials for coarse- grained bead-spring polymers,49 including a Lennard-Jones poten- tial ˜ULJ between all non-bonded beads, and both bonding ˜UB and bending ˜Uθ potentials to model each semiflexible bead-spring chain.
The overall energy is composed of a sum of these contributions, ˜U = ˜UB + ˜Uθ + ˜ULJ = Ntot,n ∑ i, j>i ˜uB,ij + Ntot,n ∑ i, j>i,k>i, j ˜uθ,ijk + ∑ α=n,p ∑ β=n,p Ntot,α ∑ i Ntot,β ∑ j>i ˜uLJ,αβ,ij.
(2) Here, the total system energy is written in terms of independent pairwise contributions ˜uB,ij, ˜uθ,ijk, and ˜uLJ,αβ,ij.
Bonded monomers interact through harmonic bonding potential, ˜uB,ij = ˜k 2(˜r ij −1)2Θij.
(3) A large spring constant ˜k = 2000 is adopted to enforce the equi- librium distance ˜rij = 1 between bonded beads i and j.
The fac- tor Θij determines the connectivity between monomer pairs, with Θij = 1 being connected and Θij = 0 being disconnected; these values depend on the specific network that is formed.
A bending energy is similarly introduced to account for chain stiffness, ˜uθ,ijk = ˜kθ[1 −cos θijk]Θijk.
(4) Here, the bond angle is between three adjacent beads i, j, and k whose connectivity is determined by a similar factor Θijk to the one used for the bonding potential.
The bending constant ˜kθ = 1.52 is selected to reflect the experimental Kuhn length of PnBA.50–53 Further details of the parameterization are given in the literature.42 A Lennard- Jones (LJ) potential is used to describe all non-bonded interactions between particles i and j on species α and β, ˜uLJ,αβ,ij = ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ 4˜ϵαβ ⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ ( ˜d α+ ˜d β 2˜r αβ ) 12 −( ˜d α+ ˜d β 2˜r αβ ) 6⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ , 0, otherwise, ˜rαβ < ˜rcut=2.5 × ˜dα+ ˜dβ 2 .
(5) Here, α, β ∈{n, p} denotes the species as either network (n) or pen- etrant (p), with n denoting the monomer bead in the network, and p denotes the penetrant.
In the overall summation, Ntot, n = NcNm is the total number of network beads and Ntot, p = Np is the total number of penetrant beads.
The monomer size ˜dn = 1 is always unity (i.e., dn = σ), and the penetrant size ˜dp ≡˜d is an important parameter for this study.
In this study, we do not consider specific penetrant-polymer attractions, so we set ˜ϵnn = ˜ϵnp = ˜ϵpp = 1.
The system is first equilibrated at ˜T = 1 and ˜P = 0, and then, networks are prepared by cross-linking the linear chains with reac- tive beads randomly distributed along the chain.42,54,55 The total number of reactive beads is Nr = frNmNc, where fr is the fraction of reactive beads, which tunes the cross-link density of networks.
If the distance between a reactive bead and a free bead (orange beads in Fig. 1) is within ˜Rmin = 1.1, a new permanent bond will be formed, given an assigned probability.
Once a reactive bead forms a bond with a free bead, both the reactive bead and the free bead are labeled as cross-link beads (dark blue beads in Fig. 1), and these two beads represent one cross-link “molecule” in a way that reflects the specific chemistry used to synthesize PnBA networks,25 where the cross- linker molecular weight is roughly twice of the molecular weight of nBA.
Cross-linking reactions were turned off once every reactive bead has formed a new bond with another free monomer (maximum number of possible bonds has been reached).
In the end, Nr reactive beads have reacted with the Nr free beads, resulting in 2Nr cross- link beads associated with Nr cross-link molecules.
The cross-link density, fcross, of networks is defined as42 fcross = ncross−link ncross−link + nmonomer = Nr NmNc −Nr .
(6) Here, ncross-link and nmonomer are the number of cross-link molecules and nBA monomers, respectively.
Four values of cross-link fraction fcross are considered: 0.11, 0.25, 0.36, and 0.5.
After cross-linking, the system is cooled to a target temperature at a cooling rate ˜Γ = 8.3 × 10−6 (corresponding to Γ = 1.25 × 109 K/s in experimental units) and further equilibrated at constant ˜P = 0.
Another short NPT (constant number of particles, pressure, and temperature ensemble) run was performed, and the mean volume V is measured.
We then switch to a NVT ensemble by setting the system volume to the mean volume V and equilibrate the system before the final production run at NVT.
All simulations are per- formed in a Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Sim- ulator (LAMMPS)56 with a standard Nosé–Hoover thermostat and extended ensemble barostat,43,57,58 and all observables were averaged over five independent simulation trajectories.
The polymer network is characterized by its mesh size (˜ax), Kuhn segment alpha relaxation time (˜τα,K), and glass transition temperature Tg.
The mesh size of networks at different cross-link densities is defined as the averaged distance between two adjacent cross-link beads on the same chain and is tabulated in Table S1.
The value of ˜τα,K at each temperature and cross-link density was defined as the time where the temporal autocorrelation function of a Kuhn monomer vector Cλ(˜t) = ⟨P2(˜r3(˜t) ⋅˜r3(0))⟩decays to Cλ(˜tmax) + (1 −Cλ(˜tmax))/e, where Cλ(˜tmax) represents the plateau value at the long-time limit ˜tmax.59–63 Here, P2 is the second Legen- dre polynomial and ˜r3 is a vector between two beads that are three bonds apart, which reflects the choice of coarse-grained bead related to the Kuhn segment of PnBA.
Tg is then defined as when the Kuhn segment alpha relaxation time is ˜τα,K( ˜Tg) = 105.
We emphasize that this criterion corresponds to a significantly shorter timescale than in the experiment, by many orders of magnitude, and is chosen for computational convenience and tractability; however, our prior work42 has demonstrated that trends from simulations are, never- theless, remarkably consistent with experiment and theory.
More information can be found in our previous work.42 We characterize the dynamics of the penetrant motion by its alpha relaxation time, ˜τα,p, and its diffusion coefficient ˜Dp. To J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-3 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp FIG.
1. (a) Schematic illustrating the setup of our simulation.
Monomer beads (orange) and cross-linker beads (blue) interact via bonding (˜uB,ij) and angle (˜uθ,ijk) potentials and can interact with each other and with the penetrant through Lennard-Jones potentials (˜uLJ,ij).
Monomer and cross-linker beads have a diameter ˜dn = 1 and the penetrant has a diameter ˜dp.
Cross-linking occurs during an initial simulation step where “reactive” beads (light blue) will form bonds with regular monomers within a cutoff distance ˜Rmin.
(b) Snapshot of a typical simulation for d/σ = 2.0 and fcross = 0.11.
calculate ˜τα,p, we use the self-intermediate scattering function (ISF) of the penetrant, which is given by60 Fs(˜q, ˜t) = 1 Np Np ∑ j ⟨exp [−i˜q ⋅(˜rp j(˜t) −˜rp j(0))]⟩, (7) where ˜rp j is the position of the jth penetrant at time ˜t and ∣˜q∣is set to the position of the first peak of the static structure factor for the networks, corresponding to ∣˜q∣= 7.2.
The value of ˜τα,p is defined as the time required for Fs(˜q, ˜t) to decay to either 1/e or 0.1 from its initial (˜t = 0) value of unity.
We characterize the mean-squared displacement (MSD) as a function of time: MSD(˜t) = ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩ = 1 Np ∑ Np j ⟨(˜rp j(˜t) −˜r p j(0))2⟩. The diffusion coefficient of pene- trant is then obtained via the Einstein relation in the diffusive regime, ˜Dp = lim ˜t→∞ 1 6˜t ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩.64 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Penetrant hopping and transport in dense networks We first characterize the diffusive motion of penetrants in poly- mer networks by studying the mean square displacement, ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩, of both small (d/σ = 1.0) and large (d/σ = 2.0) penetrants.
These two particle sizes are representative of experimental systems used in previous work by some of the authors;26 the network polymer PnBA is coarse-grained so that σ = 0.573 nm, and hence, d/σ ∼1 −2 spans the typical size of molecular penetrants.26 This choice also corresponds to the general length scale of the mesh size in the literature,25,65 which here ranges size from ˜ax ∼1.3 −2.5 (see Table S1) such that the size ratio range spans C = d/ax = 0.4 −1.5.
The MSD vs time ˜t is plotted for both particle sizes in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) for d/σ = 1.0 and d/σ = 2.0, respectively, varying both the cross-link density fcross and temperature.
These plots show typi- cal features characteristic of molecular diffusion.
At short times, the particle exhibits ballistic motion such that the MSD scales as ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩∼˜t 2; however, this regime gives way to a subdiffusive regime that we attribute to molecular caging by neighboring network monomers.
At long times, the particle can overcome the kinetic con- straints imposed by these cages, along with any constraints due to the network mesh, and undergo Fickian diffusion where ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩∼˜t 1.
These general features of diffusive motion are observed for both pen- etrant sizes and all cross-link densities and temperatures; however, the specifics of penetrant caging and diffusive motion will be affected by these parameters.
The onset of the subdiffusive regime following the initial, ballis- tic penetrant motion provides insights into the timescales of caging, and large differences in the persistence of this regime are observed as fcross, T, and d/σ are varied.
To characterize this regime, we plot in Fig. S2 the slope of the log⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩vs log ˜t curve on a log–log plot (β = d log⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩/d log ˜t) as a function of time ˜t.
The minimum value of β is an estimate for the time ˜tβ at which the penetrant is maximally subdiffusive or caged, and the value of ⟨˜r 2 p(˜t β)⟩1/2 corre- spondingly quantifies a transient localization length.
A representa- tive quantity is indicated in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) with an open square, showing the caging onset for T = 300 and fcross = 0.11.
We only indicate a single representative value for each particle size because the displacement ⟨˜r 2 p(˜t β)⟩1/2 is only weakly dependent on temper- ature and cross-link densities and is far smaller than the length scale of the penetrant diameter (⟨˜r 2 p(˜t β)⟩1/2 ∼0.22 for d/σ = 1 and ⟨˜r 2 p(˜t β)⟩1/2 ∼0.32 for d/σ = 2).
This insensitivity leads us to interpret this onset of caging as tied to the structural correla- tions of the surrounding melt beads.
Similar metrics to determine the timescale of caging yield similar results; for example, we also determined the normalized velocity autocorrelation function of J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-4 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp FIG. 2.
Mean square displacement ⟨˜rp2(˜t)⟩vs time ˜t of a penetrant particle with sizes (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0 for several values of T and fcross.
Open squares denote a representative location at which the penetrant is maximally subdiffusive or caged, defined as the minimum slope β on this plot (see Fig. S2) and chosen for T = 300 K and fcross = 0.11.
The analogous point for other values of T and fcross would be almost identical.
The open circles denote the length scale of the polymer network mesh size, as described in Table S1.
The long-time data Fickian region, where the slope of this plot β = 1, is used to determine the penetrant diffusion constant ˜Dp.
penetrants, with representative plots shown in Fig. S3 that are consistent with the values of ˜tβ.
For both small (d/σ = 1) and large (d/σ = 2) penetrants, the value of β →1 at long times corresponds to Fickian behavior; however, the time that it takes to reach this limit increases with decreasing temperature (Fig. 2 and Fig. S2).
This is the expected result of having less thermal energy to overcome a dynamic caging barrier,24,66 especially as our simulations approach T g.
Similarly, an increase of cross-link density fcross monotonically increases the length of this subdiffusive regime and the minimum value of β concomitantly decreases (Fig. S2) so that the MSD nearly exhibits a transient plateau.
In principle, this is due to some combination of (1) an increase in the caging barrier because of the concomi- tant increase in the segmental relaxation time (cage lifetime) due to cross-links42 and (2) the impact of mesh confinement impeding penetrant motion.27,28,30 In this paper, a major result will be to show that the first interpretation is the dominant determinant of penetrant mobility for the models studied, especially as T g is approached.
This is apparent already by comparing the features in the MSD vs ˜t to the mesh size ˜ax, which are tabulated in Table S1 for several differ- ent values of fcross and indicated in Fig. 2 and Fig. S2 as open circles.
This length scale is often only accessed in or near the Fickian regime, suggesting that any effect of the geometric mesh on the subdiffusive transport of the penetrant in these simulations is subtle and not read- ily apparent from the MSD vs ˜t plot alone.
Despite this observation, it is apparent that both the temperature and cross-link density effects still depend on the penetrant size, with more pronounced changes in the subdiffusive regime for the larger (d/σ = 2) penetrants than the smaller (d/σ = 1) penetrants as T and fcross are varied.
The MSD provides a molecular measure of penetrant transport, with the long-time Fickian regime allowing for the determination of the macroscopic diffusion coefficient ˜Dp of the penetrant.
How- ever, this quantity ( ˜Dp) is determined by, in principle, the cumulative effect of both local particle motions and any larger length-scale effects of the network mesh confinement on transport.
To decon- volute these contributions, we also consider the time evolution of the self-ISF Fs(˜q, ˜t) in Fig. 3.
Here, we select a value ∣˜q∣= 7.2 that is chosen to reflect the local structural cage of the polymer network and not the length scale of the network mesh.
The curves shown in Fig. 3 thus primarily account for the dynamics of local relax- ation and hopping and quantify the extent to which the penetrant remains within its original cage as a function of time.
The first part of this decay is independent of temperature and cross-linking; this corresponds to the initial ballistic motion of the penetrant observed in Fig. 2 and may include contributions from partial fast relax- ations due to a distribution of network alpha times associated with dynamic heterogeneity.67 There are some subtle differences between the different penetrant sizes (d/σ = 1.0 vs 2.0) that we attribute to different masses of the penetrants, and they are also apparent in Fig. 2.
At longer times, the decay of Fs(˜q, ˜t) becomes strongly depen- dent on temperature, cross-linking, and penetrant size in a manner consistent with the diffusive motion in Fig. 2.
At high tempera- tures, the smaller penetrant [Fig. 3(a)] exhibits a non-exponential, long time decay of Fs(˜q, ˜t) that we attribute to an activated, but relatively rapid, hopping process for penetrant relaxation.
As cross- linking increases, this long-time decay extends further, and its non-exponential character becomes more pronounced.
This trend is exacerbated by going to lower temperatures.
We find that there is a significant slowing down of penetrant motion even at interme- diate times; this occurs around ˜t ∼1, which is roughly when the minimum in the apparent exponent β occurs for the MSD curves (in Fig. 2 and Fig. S2) and is consistent with the interpretation of this as a state of maximal transient penetrant caging.
For larger pen- etrants [d/σ = 2.0, Fig. 3(b)], this slowing down leads to the near transient arrest of particle motion, again at ˜t ∼1, as evidenced by a plateau in Fs(˜q, ˜t) that only begins to relax at significantly longer times as the temperature is decreased or cross-linking fraction is J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-5 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp increased.
In both cases, we can attribute this arrest to the coupling of penetrant hopping to the slow segmental relaxation dynamics of the surrounding polymer segments, as Fs(q, ˜t) is a local measure of relaxation that does not directly probe the length scales relevant for mesh confinement.
We note that the penetrant hopping should also be significantly affected by the cross-linking degree, although indi- rectly, since cross-linking has strong influence on the slow segmental relaxation dynamics of the surrounding polymer segments.42 The trends seen in the intermediate scattering function plots in Fig. 3 are largely consistent with those of the MSD plots in Fig. 2; however, we note several important differences that we will use to understand the mechanisms of penetrant motion in polymer net- works.
First, we note the similarity of the MSD vs time plots in Fig. 2(a) for low temperatures and cross-link density ( T = 300 K and fcross = 0.11) and the high temperatures and cross-link den- sity (T = 339 K and fcross = 0.36); these curves almost overlap and exhibit essentially the same diffusive properties.
Yet, the shapes of these curves in Fig. 3(a) for penetrant ISF are distinctly dif- ferent, with the characteristics of local caging more apparent in the lower temperature curve.
In addition, there is a distinct differ- ence in the subdiffusive regimes seen in the MSD vs Fs(˜q, ˜t) plots, which are much more pronounced.
This is contrast to normal glass- forming liquids, for which the same supercooling degree exhibits a weaker or shorter caging regime than for the MSD that probes dif- fusion compared to Fs(˜q, ˜t), which probes structural relaxation.67–74 These disparities between the MSD vs time and Fs(˜q, ˜t) suggest that mesh confinement may contribute meaningfully to the transport of penetrants in tight networks, particularly for larger penetrants, and we seek to refine our physical understanding of this com- plicated interplay of local and long-time penetrant and network dynamics.
Comparing the role of particle size, temperature, and cross-linking on the hopping and diffusive processes in dense networks To quantify the relationship between local penetrant relaxation and diffusive motion, we extract the alpha time of the penetrant ˜τα,p from the ISF and the diffusion constant ˜Dp from the MSD.
As described in the section titled “Simulation Methods,” the diffusion constant is obtained from the long-time MSD curve via the expres- sion ˜Dp = lim t→∞ 1 6˜t ⟨˜r2 p(˜t)⟩.
The alpha time of the penetrant ˜τα,p is set from the decay of Fs(˜q, ˜t) and quantifies the time it takes to reach one of two possible criteria: Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p) = 0.1 and Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p′) = 1/e.
While the specific criterion is arbitrary, these two criteria will be used to illustrate aspects of dynamic heterogeneity.67,74–76 The quantity ˜τα,p will account for the effect of the long-time part of the relaxation curve in Fig. 3.
As shown in the literature,67 the long-time decay of the relaxation function is typically associated with the relaxation of the slowest fraction of particles and hence carries information on strong dynamic heterogeneity effects.
These long-time decays negli- gibly contribute to the value ˜τα,p′ defined at Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p′) = 1/e, which instead only weakly accounts for dynamic heterogeneity by consid- ering the most generic particles.
We consider ˜τα,p′ obtained here to be closer to the average hopping time predicted in the accompanying theoretical work36 since the theoretical alpha times are computed via a mean-field (most probable time computed) approach and dynamic heterogeneity (in the sense of a distribution of hopping times of dynamic and/or structural origin) is not introduced, although it can be included.77,78 Differences between how ˜τα,p and ˜τα,p′ depend on fcross do depend on both T and d/σ and, as we will show, can be very small or substantial.
We will primarily report ˜τα,p, considering ˜τα,p′ only where the comparison is instructive.
We can thus extract FIG. 3.
Intermediate scattering function Fs(˜q, ˜t) of the penetrant particle with (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0 with ∣˜q∣= 7.2 at T = 300 K (blue solid lines) and 339 K (red dashed lines) for a variety of cross-link densities fcross as a function of time ˜t.
The orange and purple horizontal lines define the penetrant alpha time, with the criteria Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p) = 0.1 and Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p′) = 1/e, respectively.
The former criterion (˜τα,p) is more often used in this paper because it includes the longer time tails observed in these functions that reflect a subpopulation of penetrants in long-lived cages.
The latter criterion (˜τα,p′) may more closely relate to the average hopping time that is predicted in the theory developed in our companion paper,36 which does not account for dynamic heterogeneity and a distribution of penetrant hopping times. J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-6 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp the key quantities in Eq. (1) directly from molecular simulations, the long-time diffusion ˜Dp, and a characteristic hopping or pene- trant alpha relaxation time ˜τα,p and examine how they are related and affected by the state of the network and penetrant.
We start by considering ˜τα,p, which we indicated in Fig. 3 and is typically between ˜τα,p = 101 −103 for d/σ = 1.0 and ˜τα,p = 101 −104 for d/σ = 2.0.
Our goal is not to determine any precise dependence on d/σ, but rather to explore the differences between relatively “small” and “large” molecular penetrants in the context of exper- imental systems.
We plot the inverse penetrant mean alpha times 1/˜τα,p or 1/˜τα,p′ as a function of T g(fcross)/T for several different temperatures T and cross-link fractions fcross in Fig. 4.
We empha- size that the abscissa combines two parameters we consider in our model; the temperature T is plotted in different colors in all panels of Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) for d/σ = 1.0 and d/σ = 2.0, respectively, and is directly set in our simulations.
However, we note that T g/T has multiple values for a given T due to the dependence of T g on fcross.42 In the inset of Fig. 4(a), we replot the data to show the correspond- ing plot of 1/˜τα,p vs T g/T, but grouping data at fixed fcross instead of fixed T. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show that at a fixed T, the inverse penetrant alpha relaxation time 1/˜τα,p behaves exponentially with T g(fcross), exhibiting Arrhenius-like behavior for both penetrant sizes.
As the temperature increases, the absolute value of the slope of this curve decreases, demonstrating stronger effects of glass physics at low temperatures in relation to cross-link induced T g changes.
This underscores the importance of the network segmental dynam- ics on penetrant diffusion and can be quantified by a change in the dimensionless slope of log ˜τα,p vs T g/T. To highlight how the choice of criterion Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p) = 0.1 affects our results, we plot in Fig. 4(c) how Fig. 4(a) would be changed upon choosing the alter- native criterion, Fs(˜q, ˜τα,p′) = 1/e.
In this case, similar trends are observed (i.e., an increasing dimensionless slope with decreasing temperature); however, the magnitudes of the dimensionless slopes are significantly smaller.
We speculate that this is due to the neglect of longer time-scale processes that are apparent in the extended tails of the relaxation functions seen in Fig. 3, meaning that the 1/e criterion does not fully capture important aspects of dynamic het- erogeneity effects that are accounted for with the 0.1 criterion.
For both criteria and penetrant sizes d/σ, the values for the slopes of log ˜τα,p vs T g/T are calculated and tabulated in Table I for different values of T.
We note that for both penetrant sizes, these dimen- sionless slopes exhibit similar trends to the predictions from theory in both our companion theory paper and prior work,35,36 showing a modest decrease in the magnitude of the slope with the increas- ing temperature for both ˜τα,p and ˜τα,p′. However, the magnitudes of the slopes are significantly larger for ˜τα,p than the slopes for ˜τα,p′, with the latter values in parentheses in Table I. We attribute this to the inclusion of the longer-time component of the ISF in ˜τα,p, which indicates that penetrant hopping is influenced by dynamic heterogeneity near T g due to the slower relaxation of a significant fraction of particles.67 To contrast, the longer-time decays of the ISF negligibly affect ˜τα,p′, leading to a weaker apparent coupling between the near-T g dynamics of the network and the penetrant hopping.
The two different penetrant sizes in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) exhibit similar trends, including nearly the same overall decrease of the relaxation rate by a little over two decades (over all values of T and fcross).
This supports the robustness of our analysis and conclusions drawn.
However, there are subtle but important differ- ences.
At a fixed value of T g(fcross)/T (i.e., at a fixed supercooling degree), we observe that the penetrant alpha time is roughly constant with decreasing temperature for d/σ = 1.0.
This lower temperature also corresponds to a lower value of T g(fcross) and hence a lower degree of cross-linking fcross.
This means that the degree of effec- tive supercooling as encoded in the ratio T g(fcross)/T largely dictates penetrant hopping, with the absolute temperature T playing a simi- lar role in affecting transport as the effective T g.
In this case, several effects—changing T g, absolute T, and cross-linking (fcross)—tend to compensate, resulting in a near collapse of 1/˜τα,p vs T g/T data.
This is highlighted in the inset of Fig. 4(a), which are the same data as in the main panel but grouped by fcross instead of T, and more clearly shows how well these data collapse to a single curve.
A similar collapse of 1/˜τα,p vs T g/T is also observed in the compan- ion theory paper.36 Figure.
4(b) shows that this balance no longer holds for larger penetrants d/σ = 2.0, with lower T values exhibiting faster dynamics (i.e., higher 1/˜τα,p) at a given degree of supercooling T g(fcross)/T due to the corresponding decrease in fcross.
We sug- gest that, for d/σ = 2.0, the importance of dynamic heterogeneity is less pronounced relative to that of d/σ = 1.0 penetrants due to a greater degree of self-averaging (in time and space) of the distribu- tion of matrix relaxation times by a larger penetrant.
Additionally, the effect of decreasing cross-linking dominates more than the effect of decreasing temperature, resulting in a higher value of 1/˜τα,p.
This contrasts with Fig. 4(c), where 1/˜τα,p′ increases with temperature at a fixed T g(fcross)/T; here, dynamic heterogeneity becomes negligible, and the effects of cross-linking become even less pronounced than the absolute temperature.
This same competition is apparent in the diffusion constant ˜Dp, which we plot in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) for d/σ = 1.0 and d/σ = 2.0, respectively, and at the same conditions plotted in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b).
As discussed above, the diffusion constant is defined at longer time and length scales than the length scale of the cross-linking mesh size (see Fig. 2 and Fig. S2).
This quantity is influenced by dynamic heterogeneity effects at lower temperatures, where glassy dynamics becomes important, but is also affected by the presence of cross- linkers.
We thus expect its behavior to be similar to 1/˜τα,p instead of 1/˜τα,p′, as confirmed below.
Like 1/˜τα,p, ˜Dp exhibits Arrhenius-like behavior as defined by a straight line on a log ˜Dp vs T g/T plot.
The primary difference is in the relative magnitude change in Dp at dif- ferent degrees of supercooling T g/T. ˜Dp still exhibits a near-collapse for d/σ = 1.0; however, it generally decreases more slowly than 1/˜τα,p in Fig. 4(a).
For the larger penetrant size d/σ = 2.0, the situation is more complicated.
In this case, high temperatures T in Fig. 5(b) show a more dramatic decrease in ˜Dp with T g/T than that of 1/˜τα,p in Fig. 4(b), but a similar decrease at lower temperatures.
These effects are quantified by calculating the dimensionless slope of the −log ˜Dp vs T g/T relationship, which we include in Table I for both pene- trant sizes.
Here, the ˜Dp slopes are significantly smaller than the 1/˜τα,p slopes for d/σ = 1.0, but are similar or larger than 1/˜τα,p for d/σ = 2.0.
The latter behavior for d/σ = 2.0 is qualitatively consis- tent with the results in our companion theory paper,36 which finds that the diffusion constant ˜Dp changes with supercooling T g/T are similar to, or more pronounced than, the corresponding inverse ˜τα,p.
For d/σ = 1.0, however, the theory predicts that the ˜Dp slopes J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-7 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp FIG.
4. Inverse penetrant alpha time 1/˜τα,p calculated from simulations as a function of T g(fcross)/T for several temperatures T and penetrant sizes (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0.
In (a), there is a noticeable collapse to a single curve, which we illustrate more clearly in the inset by grouping the data with respect to fcross.
This collapse is no longer observed in (b).
We also plot the shorter-time criteria for the penetrant alpha time 1/˜τα,p′ vs T g(fcross)/T in (c) for /σ = 1.0 to demonstrate that the coupling of penetrant hopping to cross-link density is noticeably weaker when the long-time part of the intermediate scattering function is no longer included.
The dimensionless slopes of these plots are calculated and included in Table I. TABLE I. Dimensionless slope for log ˜τα,p or ˜D−1 p vs Tg/T from simulations at several temperatures (T = 300, 320, and 339 K) and penetrant sizes (d/σ = 1 and 2).
Both criteria ˜τα,p and ˜τα,p′ (in parentheses) are considered.
T/K d/σ 300 320 339 log (˜τα,p) vs Tg/T 1.0 15.57 (7.79) 8.59 (3.98) 8.01 (1.97) log(1/Dp) vs Tg/T 1.0 9.34 7.48 5.79 log (˜τα,p)vs Tg/T 2.0 18.13 (16.10) 12.86 (8.78) 14.80 (9.60) log(1/Dp)vs Tg/T 2.0 17.47 19.27 18.12 are similar to the inverse ˜τα,p slopes, in contrast to the simulation observation that the ˜Dp slopes are much smaller.
We attribute this disparity between simulation and theory to the larger importance of dynamic heterogeneity for smaller penetrants in our simulations67 because the theory only makes predictions for a mean (in a Kramers first passage time sense) penetrant alpha time that is closer to the value of ˜τα,p′. Indeed, for d/σ = 1.0, the relative slopes for ˜Dp and 1/˜τα,p′ calculated using this criterion (in parentheses in Table I) are much more consistent with the theoretical predictions.36 To contextualize the relationship between the diffusion con- stant ˜Dp, inverse penetrant alpha time 1/˜τα,p, temperature T, and particle size ratio d/σ, we plot both ˜Dp and 1/˜τα,p as a function of T g/T in Fig. 6 for two temperatures each.
We have used a multiplier A to align these datasets at the leftmost points to compare the effect of changing the cross-linking fraction fcross (and concomitantly the T g) on ˜Dp vs 1/˜τα,p.
For small particles (d/σ = 1.0), the value of ˜Dp (solid symbols) exhibits a weaker decrease with the degree of super- cooling T g/T than 1/˜τα,p (open symbols) for both temperatures.
We believe that this is again a dynamic heterogeneity effect, which may be related to the well-known breakdown of the Stokes–Einstein relation in one-component glass forming liquids,67–74 where the dif- fusion constant is understood to be dominated by the subpopulation of particles undergoing rapid transport and is thus less dependent on T g/T than the particle hopping time that characterizes a relaxation process.67 We support this physical interpretation by plotting both the van Hove distributions (Figs. S4 and S5) and the corresponding non-Gaussian parameter28,79–82 (Fig. S6) for d/σ = 1.0 simulations, demonstrating a significant non-Gaussian behavior characteristic of dynamic heterogeneity that grows with increasing fcross and decreas- ing T. To contrast, for larger particles (d/σ = 2.0), the change in the diffusion constant ˜Dp tracks the change in 1/˜τα,p with increas- ing fcross at low temperatures (T = 300 K) and even decreases more than 1/˜τα,p with increasing fcross at higher temperatures (T = 339 K).
This indicates that there is an additional mechanism slowing down diffusive penetrant motion at length scales longer than what is probed in the intermediate scattering function (the local penetrant cage corresponding to 1/˜τα,p), which we attribute to the effect of mesh confinement.
A similar comparison between ˜Dp and 1/˜τα,p′ (not shown) for both sizes demonstrates that ˜Dp exhibits a stronger decrease with T g/T than 1/˜τα,p′ for all temperatures studied.
This does not relate to the normal Stokes–Einstein breakdown because it only weakly accounts for dynamic heterogeneity, but does fur- ther suggest the importance of the mesh confinement effect on the diffusion constant.
To isolate the role of mesh confinement, we refer to the form of Eq. (1) that writes the diffusion constant as the product of 1/˜τα,p and a mesh confinement factor X.
The form predicted for X is model-dependent,27,28,30 but we can directly evaluate this quantity from simulation by taking the product X = ˜Dp ˜τα,p. We plot ˜Dp ˜τα,p in Fig. 7 for both penetrant sizes as a function of T g/T and T, in analogy with Figs. 4 and 5.
Figure 7(a) plots this product for small penetrants (d/σ = 1.0), and as expected from Figs. 4(a) and 5(a), the data roughly collapse to a single curve that increases monotonically with the degree of supercooling T g/T. This trend is expected for J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-8 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp FIG.
5. (a) Penetrant diffusion constant ˜Dp as a function of T g(fcross)/T for several temperatures T and penetrant sizes (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0.
These are the same conditions as in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b), and similarly, there is a collapse in (a) that is no longer present in (b).
The dimensionless slopes of these plots are calculated and included in Table I. FIG. 6.
Comparison of the penetrant diffusion constant ˜Dp and inverse penetrant alpha time 1/˜τα,p as a function of T g(fcross)/T at both high (339 K) and low (300 K) temperatures for (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0.
Note that 1/˜τα,p is vertically shifted down by a factor (a) A = 3.89 × 10−2 and (b) A = 2.53 × 10−2 such that the leftmost point of alpha time 1/˜τα,p at a given temperature coincides with the corresponding ˜Dp data point for a better comparison.
In (a), this comparison shows that ˜Dp exhibits a weaker dependence than 1/˜τα,p with T g(fcross)/T for all temperatures, while in (b), ˜Dp exhibits a stronger dependence than 1/˜τα,p at high temperatures.
one-component glass-forming liquids due to alpha process dynamic heterogeneity,67 so in this case, the network primarily affects pen- etrant transport through the dependence of T g on fcross.
Similar behaviors are observed for larger penetrants (d/σ = 1.5, Fig. S7).
Notably, this monotonic increase in ˜Dp ˜τα,p′ is no longer seen when the 1/e criterion is considered [see the inset of Fig. 7(a)], demonstrat- ing that the longer time decay in the ISF should be responsible for the behavior in the main panel of Fig. 7(a).
Similarly, the product ˜Dp ˜τα,K that instead considers the timescale of the matrix polymer (Fig. S8a) also does not collapse.
Moreover, its dependence of the product ˜Dp ˜τα,K on T g/T is weak, reflecting the small degree to which the penetrant diffusivity and matrix alpha relaxation times are decou- pled.
To contrast the small penetrant case, Fig. 7(b) plots the product ˜Dp ˜τα,p for larger penetrants (d/σ = 2.0), and they exhibit a significant decrease with T g/T for each of the higher temperatures T = 339 and 320 K.
This is also apparent for the alternative product ˜Dp ˜τα,K in Fig. S8b.
For a constant temperature, the increase with T g/T corre- sponds to an increase in both fcross and C. We can thus attribute this dependence to the effect of mesh confinement (and also the reduced importance of dynamic heterogeneity since larger particles tend to average over it per discussions above), as this decrease of ˜Dp ˜τα,p = X with C is predicted by both Cai et al.27 and Dell and Schweizer.30 However, this trend is less noticeable for the lowest temperature T = 300 K, where within error, ˜Dp ˜τα,p remains roughly constant (slightly nonmonotonic) because at lower temperatures, the dynamic heterogeneity effect becomes more important.
The expected increase in ˜Dp ˜τα,p for glassy melts due to dynamic hetero- geneity appears to cancel out any mesh confinement effects, indicat- ing that the local caging and mesh confinement both contribute to penetrant dynamics in this limit. J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-9 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp FIG. 7.
The product ˜Dp ˜τα,p as a function of T g(fcross)/T for several temperatures T for (a) d/σ = 1.0 and (b) d/σ = 2.0 with the 0.1 ISF decay criterion.
For (a), there is a collapse to an increasing curve that reflects the breakdown of Stokes–Einstein behavior typically observed in fragile glass forming liquids.
The inset shows the same plot, but using the 1/e criterion.
For (b) at high temperatures, each temperature exhibits a monotonic decrease in the product ˜Dp ˜τα,p that we attribute to the effect of entropic mesh confinement.
At low temperatures (T = 300 K) and d/σ = 2.0, the increase due to dynamic heterogeneity appears to counteract the effect of mesh confinement, leading to a roughly constant value of ˜Dp ˜τα,p. FIG.
8. Degree of decoupling between penetrant and Kuhn segment alpha relax- ation times quantified by the ratio ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K as a function of T g(fcross)/T for several temperatures and both d/σ = 1.0 and d/σ = 2.0.
While the trends with T g(fcross)/T are quite weak, the larger penetrant d/σ = 2.0 couples significantly more strongly to the segmental dynamics of the surrounding network, as evident in the order-of-magnitude larger value of ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K when compared to the smaller penetrant d/σ = 1.0.
Network and penetrant dynamic decoupling To quantify penetrant dynamics, we determined both the rate of local hopping via 1/˜τα,p and the long-time diffusion via ˜Dp.
Our results demonstrated that (1) both processes were primarily governed by local network segmental motion (i.e., glass physics) at low temperatures, yet (2) cross-links, nevertheless, had a more pronounced effect on ˜Dp for larger penetrants (d/σ = 2.0 versus d/σ = 1.0 in Table I) or for situations that dynamic heterogeneity is not important.
To understand these two observations, we quantify the coupling between the penetrant alpha time ˜τα,p′ and the net- work alpha relaxation time ˜τα,K, where the latter is obtained from the autocorrelation function of the Kuhn monomer vector according to our prior work as briefly described in the section titled “Simulation Methods.42” In this case, we use the short-time criterion ˜τα,p′ due to its better consistency with both the theoretical predictions36 and the weaker effect of dynamic heterogeneity and to match the 1/e crite- rion used in calculating ˜τα,K previously.42 The ratio between these two properties ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K is plotted as a function of T g/T in Fig. 8 for both penetrant sizes and all temperatures T studied; this compari- son has previously demonstrated to be useful in the self-consistent cooperative hopping (SCCH) theory of hard sphere mixtures and dilute penetrants in polymer melts24,66,83 and quantifies the degree of “dynamic coupling/decoupling.” In these previous theoretical papers, the ratio ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K was studied as a function of “packing fraction,” which is qualitatively analogous to inverse temperature.66 The theory predicted that the ratio ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K (1) initially increases slightly as the temperature is lowered from high temperature and then (2) sharply decreases in a penetrant size-dependent manner (stronger decrease for smaller penetrants) as temperature is further lowered toward the glassy state.
This indicates a strong decoupling between penetrant and matrix dynamics in the supercooled regime.
In Fig. 8, both penetrants show only a modest depen- dence of ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K on T g/T, spanning only roughly a decade in the simulation-accessible weakly supercooled regime.
We do not observe the characteristic decrease in ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K theoretically pre- dicted for the deeply supercooled regime, which is expected to be computationally inaccessible, though our trends are consistent with the weak changes in ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K predicted by the theory in the polymer alpha relaxation time range probed in our simulation.36 Importantly, the relative magnitude of these ratios is instructive.
We find that J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-10 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp ˜τα,p′/˜τα,K for the d/σ = 2.0 penetrant is at least an order of magni- tude larger than that for the d/σ = 1.0 penetrant, indicating that it is more strongly coupled to the surrounding matrix as generically expected and as predicted by SCCH theory.24,36,66,83 This helps us explain our results for 1/˜τα,p and ˜Dp in the previous section com- paring the role of particle size, temperature, and cross-linking on penetrant transport; in those results, there was a stronger depen- dence of ˜Dp for the larger penetrants on fcross even at lower tem- peratures where mesh confinement is not dominant (see Table I).
We can now attribute this to the stronger matrix-penetrant cou- pling for larger penetrants, rather than enhanced mesh confinement contribution.
Degeneracy of mesh size effects due to confinement and glassy dynamics From a molecular viewpoint, we only see significant mesh con- finement effects on penetrant diffusion in the limit of large particles and high temperatures, while for small molecules or low temper- atures, we find that cross-linking dominantly impacts penetrant diffusion primarily through its effect on the local segmental relax- ation of the polymer matrix.
However, even in this latter limit, we can demonstrate results empirically consistent with aspects of Eq. (1) if we plot our data vs the confinement ratio C rather than the extent of supercooling T g/T. We consider two candidate models for X by plotting C ˜Dp vs C2 in Fig. 9(a) based on the predictions of Cai et al.27 and ˜Dp vs C in Fig. 9(b) based on the predictions of Dell and Schweizer.30 Despite already demonstrating that mesh confine- ment does not play a significant role for small penetrants, these plots exhibit remarkably good agreement with the functional forms pre- dicted by both models as indicated by the nearly linear trends in these semi-log plots.
This agrees with previous work28,35 that shows that both predictions, while they differ modestly in the details of how they describe entropic mesh confinement, are remarkably similar.
We are thus unable to determine which model is more suitable over the parameter ranges probed in our simulation.
However, there is a non-negligible change in the slope in both plots of Fig. 9 as the tem- perature T is changed, which is not consistent with either entropic mesh confinement model.27,29,30 According to Eq. (1), these models only have a temperature dependence in the prefactor 1/τα, p (plot- ted also vs C from simulation in Fig. S9) and not in the exponent of the entropic mesh confinement factor X.
This key observation, which is also shown theoretically in the companion paper,36 allows the effects of cross-linking on the penetrant relaxation time to be distinguished from the effects of cross-linking due to mesh confine- ment, in the absence of simulation determination of 1/τα,p, though this distinguishing feature may become weak as in the case of larger penetrants, as is shown in the supplementary material (d/σ = 2.0, Fig. S10).
CONCLUSION In this paper, we used simulation to understand the role of glassy segmental scale dynamics vs entropic mesh confinement on the diffusion and alpha relaxation of molecular penetrants in perma- nently cross-linked polymer networks.
We consider a specific form for the diffusion constant, Dp ∼(d2/τα,p)X, that allows us to isolate the effect of network mesh confinement X through calculating and studying both the diffusion constant ˜Dp and the penetrant hopping or alpha relaxation time ˜τα,p.
Both quantities exhibit Arrhenius-like trends with the degree of effective supercooling T g/T at a fixed tem- perature due to the dependence of T g on the extent of cross-linking.
This strong coupling between penetrant hopping and cross-linking dependent glassy dynamics is not only consistent with theoretical predictions in the companion paper36 but also exhibits significant breakdown in the Stokes–Einstein relationship if strong dynamic heterogeneity effects67,74–76 are apparent in the hopping dynamics of the smaller molecular penetrants as the system is supercooled to larger values of T g/T.67 For small penetrants, the effect of cross- linking on T g is demonstrated to dominate diffusive motion, with FIG. 9.
The penetrant diffusion constant ˜Dp plotted with respect to the confinement ratio C as suggested by the forms of various literature predictions for mesh confinement effects.
(a) Cai et al.23 predicted that ˜Dp ∝C−1 exp (−C2), and (b) Dell and Schweizer26 predicted that ˜Dp ∝exp (−bC).
Both ways of plotting these data appear linear, even though mesh confinement does not play a major role in penetrant transport for the d/σ = 1.0 case plotted here.
The main indication that simulations do not agree with the idea that entropic mesh confinement is dominant lies in the temperature-dependent slopes, which for mesh confinement should not change with temperature. J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-11 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp a collapse to a single dependence of both ˜τα,p and ˜Dp on T g/T. This collapse is no longer apparent for larger penetrants, where we show by plotting the product ˜Dp ˜τα,p as a function of T g/T that we see the signatures of mesh confinement.
While we find that cross- linking affects molecular penetrant transport through both its effect on T g and through mesh confinement, the former appears to be the dominant mechanism for our simulations and we expect that it will also be the dominant for deeply supercooled experiments.
We can also show, however, that the diffusion constant ˜Dp still follows trends predicted in the literature for mesh confinement27,28,30 due to a degeneracy of how cross-link fraction changes with T g and mesh size as predicted by SCCH theory.36 This underscores the difficulty in drawing conclusions on transport mechanisms from diffusion data alone.
The importance of activated glassy dynamics on the diffusive motion of small molecular penetrants in polymer networks sug- gests directions for future study and ways in which the selective transport of these species could be engineered into polymer mate- rials.
In particular, we anticipate that the role of molecular shape and penetrant-matrix interactions may complicate the relations we show between entropic mesh confinement and segmental relaxation.
For penetrants that are highly non-spherical, their size will now be related to two or more length scales that may be more or less affected by entropic mesh confinement and will possess anisotropic inter- actions with the surrounding matrix that may affect the penetrant alpha time.
Penetrant-matrix specific attractive interactions may also affect activated penetrant dynamics, for example, by affecting the coupling between penetrant and Kuhn segment alpha relaxation times, as recently discussed theoretically.24 While related questions have been theoretically studied by some of the authors,24,26 simu- lation will provide further molecular insights into the role of these various transport effects.
Finally, the important role of dynamic het- erogeneity on penetrant hopping suggests that there are possibilities for tuning the selectivity of molecular transport in networks with dynamic or exchangeable bonds, which would introduce another competing timescale that has recently been shown experimentally to affect penetrant diffusion.84 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS See the supplementary material for additional figures and table to further support the conclusions obtained in the main text in different cross-linking degrees, temperatures, and penetrant sizes, including the effect from system size, the slope change of mean- square displacement, the normalized velocity autocorrelation func- tion, the van Hove function, the non-Gaussian function, and the additional temperature or penetrant size dependence of penetrant diffusion constant, inverse alpha time, or product of these two variables as a function of T g/T or C (C2).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering (Award No. DE-SC0020858), through the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Helpful discussions with Christopher Evans are gratefully acknowledged.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS Conflict of Interest The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
Author Contributions Tsai-Wei Lin: Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal); Software (equal); Validation (equal); Visualization (equal); Writ- ing – original draft (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).
Baicheng Mei: Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (equal); Validation (equal); Visualization (equal); Writing – original draft (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).
Kenneth S. Schweizer: Conceptualization (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Funding acqui- sition (equal); Project administration (equal); Resources (equal); Supervision (equal); Validation (equal); Visualization (equal); Writ- ing – original draft (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).
Charles E. Sing: Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Funding acquisition (equal); Investiga- tion (equal); Methodology (equal); Project administration (equal); Resources (equal); Software (equal); Supervision (equal); Valida- tion (equal); Visualization (equal); Writing – original draft (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).
DATA AVAILABILITY The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
REFERENCES 1B. J. Blaiszik, S. L. B. Kramer, S. C. Olugebefola, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos, and S. R. White, “Self-healing polymers and composites,” Annu. Rev. Mater.
Res. 40(1), 179–211 (2010).
2J. F. Patrick, M. J. Robb, N. R. Sottos, J. S. Moore, and S. R. White, “Polymers with autonomous life-cycle control,” Nature 540(7633), 363–370 (2016).
3H. Wang, J. K. Keum, A. Hiltner, E. Baer, B. Freeman, A. Rozanski, and A. Galeski, “Confined crystallization of polyethylene oxide in nanolayer assemblies,” Science 323(5915), 757–760 (2009).
4C. Wang, Q. Ge, D. Ting, D. Nguyen, H.-R. Shen, J. Chen, H. N. Eisen, J. Heller, R. Langer, and D. Putnam, “Molecularly engineered poly(ortho ester) microspheres for enhanced delivery of DNA vaccines,” Nat. Mater.
3(3), 190–196 (2004).
5J. Li and D. J. Mooney, “Designing hydrogels for controlled drug delivery,” Nat.
Rev. Mater. 1(12), 16071 (2016).
6S. R. White, N. R. Sottos, P. H. Geubelle, J. S. Moore, M. R. Kessler, S. R. Sriram, E. N. Brown, and S. Viswanathan, “Autonomic healing of polymer composites,” Nature 409(6822), 794–797 (2001).
7M. Galizia, W. S. Chi, Z. P. Smith, T. C. Merkel, R. W. Baker, and B. D. Freeman, “50th anniversary perspective: Polymers and mixed matrix membranes for gas and vapor separation: A review and prospective opportunities,” Macromolecules 50(20), 7809–7843 (2017). J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-12 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp 8D. F. Sanders, Z. P. Smith, R. Guo, L. M. Robeson, J. E. McGrath, D. R. Paul, and B. D. Freeman, “Energy-efficient polymeric gas separation membranes for a sustainable future: A review,” Polymer 54(18), 4729–4761 (2013).
9C. H. Lau, P. Li, F. Li, T.-S. Chung, and D. R. Paul, “Reverse-selective polymeric membranes for gas separations,” Prog. Polym.
Sci. 38(5), 740–766 (2013).
10Z.-X. Low, P. M. Budd, N. B. McKeown, and D. A. Patterson, “Gas permeation properties, physical aging, and its mitigation in high free volume glassy polymers,” Chem.
Rev. 118(12), 5871–5911 (2018).
11D. Li, X. Zhang, J. Yao, G. P. Simon, and H. Wang, “Stimuli-responsive polymer hydrogels as a new class of draw agent for forward osmosis desalination,” Chem. Commun. 47(6), 1710 (2011).
12G. M. Geise, H.-S. Lee, D. J. Miller, B. D. Freeman, J. E. McGrath, and D. R. Paul, “Water purification by membranes: The role of polymer science,” J. Polym.
Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys.
48(15), 1685–1718 (2010).
13G. M. Geise, D. R. Paul, and B. D. Freeman, “Fundamental water and salt transport properties of polymeric materials,” Prog. Polym.
Sci. 39(1), 1–42 (2014).
14X. Feng and R. Y. M. Huang, “Liquid separation by membrane pervaporation: A review,” Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 36(4), 1048–1066 (1997).
15D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, “Seven chemical separations to change the world,” Nature 532(7600), 435–437 (2016).
16N. Kosinov, J. Gascon, F. Kapteijn, and E. J. M. Hensen, “Recent developments in zeolite membranes for gas separation,” J. Membr.
Sci. 499, 65–79 (2016).
17C. A. Trickett, A. Helal, B. A. Al-Maythalony, Z. H. Yamani, K. E. Cordova, and O. M. Yaghi, “The chemistry of metal–organic frameworks for CO2 capture, regeneration and conversion,” Nat. Rev. Mater. 2(8), 17045 (2017).
18Q. Qian, P. A. Asinger, M. J. Lee, G. Han, K. Mizrahi Rodriguez, S. Lin, F. M. Benedetti, A. X. Wu, W. S. Chi, and Z. P. Smith, “MOF-based membranes for gas separations,” Chem.
Rev. 120(16), 8161–8266 (2020).
19S. Yuan, X. Li, J. Zhu, G. Zhang, P. Van Puyvelde, and B. Van der Bruggen, “Covalent organic frameworks for membrane separation,” Chem. Soc.
Rev. 48(10), 2665–2681 (2019).
20A. A. Gusev, S. Arizzi, U. W. Suter, and D. J. Moll, “Dynamics of light gases in rigid matrices of dense polymers,” J. Chem.
Phys. 99(3), 2221–2227 (1993).
21A. A. Gusev and U. W. Suter, “Dynamics of small molecules in dense polymers subject to thermal motion,” J. Chem.
Phys. 99(3), 2228–2234 (1993).
22N. C. Karayiannis, V. G. Mavrantzas, and D. N. Theodorou, “Detailed atom- istic simulation of the segmental dynamics and barrier properties of amorphous poly(ethylene terephthalate) and poly(ethylene isophthalate),” Macromolecules 37(8), 2978–2995 (2004).
23N. Vergadou and D. N. Theodorou, “Molecular modeling investigations of sorp- tion and diffusion of small molecules in glassy polymers,” Membranes 9(8), 98 (2019).
24B. Mei and K. S. Schweizer, “Theory of the effects of specific attractions and chain connectivity on the activated dynamics and selective transport of penetrants in polymer melts,” Macromolecules 55(20), 9134–9151 (2022).
25G. S. Sheridan and C. M. Evans, “Understanding the roles of mesh size, Tg, and segmental dynamics on probe diffusion in dense polymer networks,” Macromolecules 54(23), 11198–11208 (2021).
26B. Mei, G. S. Sheridan, C. M. Evans, and K. S. Schweizer, “Elucidation of the physical factors that control activated transport of penetrants in chemi- cally complex glass-forming liquids,” Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 119(41), e2210094119 (2022).
27L.-H. Cai, S. Panyukov, and M. Rubinstein, “Hopping diffusion of nanoparticles in polymer matrices,” Macromolecules 48(3), 847–862 (2015).
28V. Sorichetti, V. Hugouvieux, and W. Kob, “Dynamics of nanoparticles in poly- disperse polymer networks: From free diffusion to hopping,” Macromolecules 54(18), 8575–8589 (2021).
29Z. Xu, X. Dai, X. Bu, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Man, X. Zhang, M. Doi, and L.-T. Yan, “Enhanced heterogeneous diffusion of nanoparticles in semiflexible networks,” ACS Nano 15(3), 4608–4616 (2021).
30Z. E. Dell and K. S. Schweizer, “Theory of localization and activated hop- ping of nanoparticles in cross-linked networks and entangled polymer melts,” Macromolecules 47(1), 405–414 (2014).
31R. Poling-Skutvik, R. Krishnamoorti, and J. C. Conrad, “Size-dependent dynam- ics of nanoparticles in unentangled polyelectrolyte solutions,” ACS Macro Lett.
4(10), 1169–1173 (2015).
32M. Smith, R. Poling-Skutvik, A. H. Slim, R. C. Willson, and J. C. Conrad, “Dynamics of flexible viruses in polymer solutions,” Macromolecules 54(10), 4557–4563 (2021).
33R. Poling-Skutvik, A. H. Slim, S. Narayanan, J. C. Conrad, and R. Krish- namoorti, “Soft interactions modify the diffusive dynamics of polymer-grafted nanoparticles in solutions of free polymer,” ACS Macro Lett.
8(8), 917–922 (2019).
34T. Q. McKenzie-Smith, J. F. Douglas, and F. W. Starr, “Explaining the sensitivity of polymer segmental relaxation to additive size based on the localization model,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127(27), 277802 (2021).
35B. Mei, T.-W. Lin, G. S. Sheridan, C. M. Evans, C. E. Sing, and K. S. Schweizer, “How segmental dynamics and mesh confinement determine the selective diffu- sivity of molecules in cross-linked dense polymer networks,” ACS Cent. Sci. 9, 508 (2023).
36B. Mei, T.-W. Lin, C. E. Sing, and K. S. Schweizer, “Self-consistent hopping the- ory of activated relaxation and diffusion of dilute penetrants in dense crosslinked polymer networks,” J. Chem.
Phy. 158(18), 184901 (2023).
37Y. Chen, R. Ma, X. Qian, R. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Xu, M. Zhou, and J. Liu, “Nanoparticle mobility within permanently cross-linked polymer networks,” Macromolecules 53(11), 4172–4184 (2020).
38D. B. Hall, D. D. Deppe, K. E. Hamilton, A. Dhinojwala, and J. M. Torkelson, “Probe translational and rotational diffusion in polymers near Tg: Roles of probe size, shape, and secondary bonding in deviations from Debye–Stokes–Einstein scaling,” J. Non-Cryst.
Solids 235–237, 48–56 (1998).
39K. Zhang and S. K. Kumar, “Molecular simulations of solute transport in polymer melts,” ACS Macro Lett.
6(8), 864–868 (2017).
40K. Zhang, D. Meng, F. Müller-Plathe, and S. K. Kumar, “Coarse-grained molec- ular dynamics simulation of activated penetrant transport in glassy polymers,” Soft Matter 14(3), 440–447 (2018).
41C. Xue, X. Shi, Y. Tian, X. Zheng, and G. Hu, “Diffusion of nanoparticles with activated hopping in crowded polymer solutions,” Nano Lett.
20(5), 3895–3904 (2020).
42B. Mei, T.-W. Lin, G. S. Sheridan, C. M. Evans, C. E. Sing, and K. S. Schweizer, “Structural relaxation and vitrification in dense cross-linked polymer networks: Simulation, theory, and experiment,” Macromolecules 55(10), 4159–4173 (2022).
43D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications (Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2002).
44T. S. Jain and J. J. de Pablo, “Influence of confinement on the vibrational den- sity of states and the Boson peak in a polymer glass,” J. Chem.
Phys. 120(19), 9371–9375 (2004).
45R. A. Riggleman, J. F. Douglas, and J. J. de Pablo, “Tuning polymer melt fragility with antiplasticizer additives,” J. Chem.
Phys. 126(23), 234903 (2007).
46D. S. Simmons and J. F. Douglas, “Nature and interrelations of fast dynamic properties in a coarse-grained glass-forming polymer melt,” Soft Matter 7(22), 11010 (2011).
47J. H. Mangalara, M. E. Mackura, M. D. Marvin, and D. S. Simmons, “The relationship between dynamic and pseudo-thermodynamic measures of the glass transition temperature in nanostructured materials,” J. Chem.
Phys. 146(20), 203316 (2017).
48M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids, 2nd ed.
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017).
49K. Kremer and G. S. Grest, “Dynamics of entangled linear polymer melts: A molecular-dynamics simulation,” J. Chem.
Phys. 92(8), 5057–5086 (1990).
50M. Rubinstein and R. Colby, Polymer Physics (Oxford University Press, NY, 2003).
51D. R. Tree, A. Muralidhar, P. S. Doyle, and K. D. Dorfman, “Is DNA a good model polymer?,” Macromolecules 46(20), 8369–8382 (2013).
52S. Dutta, T. Pan, and C. E. Sing, “Bridging simulation length scales of bot- tlebrush polymers using a wormlike cylinder model,” Macromolecules 52(13), 4858–4874 (2019).
53J. F. J. Coelho, E. Y. Carvalho, D. S. Marques, A. V. Popov, V. Percec, and M. H. Gil, “Influence of the isomeric structures of butyl acrylate on its single-electron transfer-degenerative chain transfer living radical polymerization in water cat- alyzed by Na2S2O4,” J. Polym.
Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem.
46(19), 6542–6551 (2008). J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-13 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30The Journal of Chemical Physics ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp 54E. S. Minina, P. A. Sánchez, C. N. Likos, and S. S. Kantorovich, “The influence of the magnetic filler concentration on the properties of a microgel particle: Zero- field case,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
459, 226–230 (2018).
55A. J. Moreno and F. Lo Verso, “Computational investigation of microgels: Syn- thesis and effect of the microstructure on the deswelling behavior,” Soft Matter 14(34), 7083–7096 (2018).
56S. Plimpton, “Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics,” J. Comput.
Phys. 117, 1–19 (1995).
57S. Nosé, “A unified formulation of the constant temperature molecular dynamics methods,” J. Chem.
Phys. 81(1), 511–519 (1984).
58W. G. Hoover, “Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space distributions,” Phys.
Rev. A 31(3), 1695–1697 (1985).
59A. Shavit and R. A. Riggleman, “Influence of backbone rigidity on nanoscale confinement effects in model glass-forming polymers,” Macromolecules 46(12), 5044–5052 (2013).
60C. Bennemann, W. Paul, J. Baschnagel, and K. Binder, “Investigating the influence of different thermodynamic paths on the structural relaxation in a glass-forming polymer melt,” J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 11(10), 2179–2192 (1999).
61R. A. Riggleman, H.-N. Lee, M. D. Ediger, and J. J. de Pablo, “Free volume and finite-size effects in a polymer glass under stress,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
99(21), 215501 (2007).
62D. Diaz Vela and D. S. Simmons, “The microscopic origins of stretched expo- nential relaxation in two model glass-forming liquids as probed by simulations in the isoconfigurational ensemble,” J. Chem.
Phys. 153(23), 234503 (2020).
63E. Y. Lin, A. L. Frischknecht, and R. A. Riggleman, “Origin of mechani- cal enhancement in polymer nanoparticle (NP) composites with ultrahigh NP loading,” Macromolecules 53(8), 2976–2982 (2020).
64D. A. McQuarrie, Statistical Mechanics (University Science Books, Sausalito, 2000).
65P. Kumar, L. Theeyancheri, S. Chaki, and R. Chakrabarti, “Transport of probe particles in a polymer network: Effects of probe size, network rigidity and probe–polymer interaction,” Soft Matter 15(44), 8992–9002 (2019).
66B. Mei and K. S. Schweizer, “Activated penetrant dynamics in glass forming liquids: Size effects, decoupling, slaving, collective elasticity and correlation with matrix compressibility,” Soft Matter 17(9), 2624–2639 (2021).
67B. Mei, Y. Lu, L. An, and Z.-G. Wang, “Two-step relaxation and the breakdown of the Stokes-Einstein relation in glass-forming liquids,” Phys.
Rev. E 100(5), 052607 (2019).
68F. H. Stillinger and J. A. Hodgdon, “Translation-rotation paradox for diffusion in fragile glass-forming liquids,” Phys.
Rev. E 50(3), 2064–2068 (1994).
69J. A. Hodgdon and F. H. Stillinger, “Stokes-Einstein violation in glass-forming liquids,” Phys.
Rev. E 48(1), 207–213 (1993).
70P. Kumar, S. V. Buldyrev, S. R. Becker, P. H. Poole, F. W. Starr, and H. E. Stan- ley, “Relation between the Widom line and the breakdown of the Stokes–Einstein relation in supercooled water,” Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 104(23), 9575–9579 (2007).
71S. R. Becker, P. H. Poole, and F. W. Starr, “Fractional Stokes-Einstein and Debye-Stokes-Einstein relations in a network-forming liquid,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
97(5), 055901 (2006).
72S. K. Kumar, G. Szamel, and J. F. Douglas, “Nature of the breakdown in the Stokes-Einstein relationship in a hard sphere fluid,” J. Chem. Phys.
124(21), 214501 (2006).
73M. G. Mazza, N. Giovambattista, H. E. Stanley, and F. W. Starr, “Connection of translational and rotational dynamical heterogeneities with the breakdown of the Stokes-Einstein and Stokes-Einstein-Debye relations in water,” Phys.
Rev. E 76(3), 031203 (2007).
74M. D. Ediger, “Spatially heterogeneous dynamics in supercooled liquids,” Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
51(1), 99–128 (2000).
75B. Mei, B. Zhuang, Y. Lu, L. An, and Z.-G. Wang, “Local-average free volume correlates with dynamics in glass formers,” J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
13(17), 3957–3964 (2022).
76L. Berthier and G. Biroli, “Theoretical perspective on the glass transition and amorphous materials,” Rev. Mod. Phys.
83(2), 587–645 (2011).
77S.-J. Xie and K. S. Schweizer, “Microscopic theory of dynamically heterogeneous activated relaxation as the origin of decoupling of segmental and chain relaxation in supercooled polymer melts,” Macromolecules 53(13), 5350–5360 (2020).
78S.-J. Xie and K. S. Schweizer, “A collective elastic fluctuation mechanism for decoupling and stretched relaxation in glassy colloidal and molecular liquids,” J. Chem. Phys.
152(3), 034502 (2020).
79H. Cho, H. Kim, B. Sung, and J. Kim, “Tracer diffusion in tightly-meshed homo- geneous polymer networks: A Brownian dynamics simulation study,” Polymers 12(9), 2067 (2020).
80A. Godec, M. Bauer, and R. Metzler, “Collective dynamics effect transient sub- diffusion of inert tracers in flexible gel networks,” New J. Phys. 16(9), 092002 (2014).
81A. G. Cherstvy, S. Thapa, C. E. Wagner, and R. Metzler, “Non-Gaussian, non- ergodic, and non-Fickian diffusion of tracers in mucin hydrogels,” Soft Matter 15(12), 2526–2551 (2019).
82W. Kob and H. C. Andersen, “Testing mode-coupling theory for a supercooled binary Lennard-Jones mixture I: The van Hove correlation function,” Phys.
Rev. E 51(5), 4626–4641 (1995).
83R. Zhang and K. S. Schweizer, “Correlated matrix-fluctuation-mediated acti- vated transport of dilute penetrants in glass-forming liquids and suspensions,” J. Chem.
Phys. 146(19), 194906 (2017).
84J. Huang, N. Ramlawi, G. S. Sheridan, C. Chen, R. H. Ewoldt, P. V. Braun, and C. M. Evans, “Dynamic covalent bond exchange enhances penetrant diffusion in dense vitrimers,” Macromolecules 56(3), 1253–1262 (2023). J. Chem.
Phys. 159, 014904 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0148247 159, 014904-14 Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing  19 June 2025 00:25:30