896 ISSN 1063-7761, Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics, 2017, Vol. 125, No. 5, pp. 896–905.
© Pleiades Publishing, Inc., 2017.
Original Russian Text © A.Ya.
Maltsev, 2017, published in Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teoreticheskoi Fiziki, 2017, Vol. 152, No. 5, pp. 1053–1064.
Oscillation Phenomena and Experimental Determination of Exact Mathematical Stability Zones for Magneto-Conductivity in Metals Having Complicated Fermi Surfaces1 A. Ya.
Maltsev Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics,  pr.
Ak. Semenova 1A, Chernogolovka, 142432 Russia e-mail: maltsev@itp.ac.ru Received June 29, 2017 Abstract—We consider the problem of exact experimental determination of the boundaries of Stability Zones for magneto-conductivity in normal metals in the space of directions of magnetic field B.
As can be shown, this problem turns out to be nontrivial since the exact boundaries of Stability Zones are in fact unobservable in direct measurements of conductivity.
However, this problem can be effectively solved with the aid of the study of oscillation phenomena (cyclotron resonance, quantum oscillations) in normal metals, which reveal a singular behavior on the mathematical boundary of a Stability Zone.
DOI: 10.1134/S106377611711005X 1.
INTRODUCTION In this paper we consider galvano-magnetic phe- nomena in normal metals, having complicated Fermi surfaces, in the limit of the strong magnetic fields B (ωBτ ≫ 1).
In the standard approach we assume that the electron states are described by a single-particle partition function f(p) defined on the space of the qua- simomenta p ∈   for a given type of the crystal lattice of a metal.
In the equilibrium state we assume as usu- ally that all the electron states with energy (p) less than the Fermi energy are occupied (f(p) = 1) and all the states with energy higher than the Fermi energy are empty (f(p) = 0).
Let us say also that we will omit here the spin variables which will not play an essential role in our consideration.
The space of the quasimomenta p for a given con- ductivity zone represents a three-dimensional torus  given by the factorization of the space   over the reciprocal lattice vectors The vectors (a1, a2, a3) represent a basis for the reciprocal lattice and are connected with the basis vec- tors (l1, l2, l3) of the direct lattice by standard relations In this approach the Fermi surface SF: represents a compact smooth surface embedded into three-dimensional torus  .
Equivalently, we can consider the whole space of the quasimomenta ( ) and assume that any two val- ues of p which differ by a reciprocal lattice vector rep- resent the same physical state for a given conductivity zone.
In this approach the dispersion relation (p) should be considered as a three-periodic function in  with the periods a1, a2, and a3.
The Fermi surface represents in this case a three-periodic surface in  which can have in general a rather complicated form (see e.g. Fig. 1).
In the quasiclassical approximation the evolution of the electron states in metal in the presence of elec- tric and magnetic fields can be described by the adia- batic system In the limit of the strong magnetic fields the behav- ior of conductivity is actually defined by the geometry of the dynamical system (1.1) 1 The article was translated by the authors.
3 T e 3 T 3 R = + + ∈ 3 3 1 1 2 2 3 3 1 2 3 { }, , , .
n n n n n n a a a T R Z × × = π = π ℏ ℏ 2 3 3 1 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 2 , 2 , ( , , ) ( , , ) l l l l a a l l l l l l × = πℏ 1 2 3 1 2 3 2 .
( , , ) l l a l l l = ( ) F p e e 3 T 3 R e 3 R 3 R = × +  [ ( ) ] .
gr e e c p v p B E = × = ∇ ×  [ ( ) ] [ ( ) ], gr e e c c p v p B p B e ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF SOLIDJOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 OSCILLATION PHENOMENA AND EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 897 which will play the basic role in our considerations here.
System (1.1) is integrable from analytical point of view and its trajectories are given by the intersections of the constant energy levels (p) = const with the planes, orthogonal to B.
At the same time, the global geometry of the trajectories of (1.1) can still be rather nontrivial in the p-space, which can be seen if we con- sider an intersection of a complicated Fermi surface by an arbitrary plane (Fig. 2).
An important role of the geometry of open trajec- tories of system (1.1) for the behavior of conductivity e in strong magnetic fields was first revealed by the school of I.M. Lifshitz (I.M. Lifshitz, M.Ya.
Azbel, M.I. Kaganov, V.G. Peschasky) in 1950's (see [1–8]).
Thus, in the paper [1] the crucial difference between the contribution of the closed and open periodic tra- jectories (Fig. 3) of (1.1) to the conductivity tensor in the limit ωBτ → ∞ was ﬁrst described.
In papers [2, 3] more general types of open trajecto- ries, which are not periodic in p-space and are locally stable with respect to small rotations of B were consid- ered.
Both the open periodic trajectories of (1.1) and more general trajectories, considered in [2, 3], have a mean direction in the p-space which results in strong anisotropy of their contribution to the conductivity in the plane orthogonal to B. Thus, if we chose the z-axis along the direction of B and the x-axis along the mean direction of the open trajectories in p-space we can write for the limiting values of the conductivity tensor σkl(B): (1.2) In formula (1.2) the value n denotes the mean con- centration of the conductivity electrons in metal and m* has a meaning of the effective electron mass in the crystal.
The value τ has a meaning of the mean free electron motion time, and * denote just some dimen- sionless constants of order of unity.
Let us note that the projection of a quasiclassical electron trajectory in x-space on the plane orthogonal to B coincides with the corresponding trajectory in p-space, rotated by 90°, which explains the form of the tensor (1.2).
It’s not difficult to see that the measurement of the con- ductivity in the plane orthogonal to B gives a possibil- ity to find the mean direction of the open trajectories in p-space, which coincides with the direction of the lowest conductivity in the limit ωBτ → ∞.
For comparison, the contribution of the closed tra- jectories of system (1.1) to the conductivity tensor is almost isotropic in the plane orthogonal to B in the limit ωBτ → ∞, and we can write for its limiting values where  = B/B.
The general problem of classification of different tra- jectories of system (1.1) with arbitrary periodic dispersion relation (p) was set by S.P. Novikov ([9]) and was inten- sively studied in his topological school (S.P. Novikov, A.V. Zorich, S.P. Tsarev, I.A. Dynnikov).
Let us say here, that this problem turned out to be highly non- trivial in its general formulation and required a set of rather deep topological results for its complete investi- gation (see [10–14]).
The most important achieve- ∞ ⎛ ⎞ τ⎜ ⎟ σ = ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ 2 0 0 0 0 * * .
* 0 * * kl ne m ∞ ⎛ ⎞ τ⎜ ⎟ σ = ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 , * 0 0 * kl ne m ˆz e Fig. 1.
A complicated Fermi surface as a 3-periodic surface in the p-space. Fig. 2.
An intersection of a complicated Fermi surface by a plane of general direction in the p-space.
B Fig. 3. Closed (a) and open periodic (b) electron trajecto- ries on the Fermi surfaces of different forms.
B B (a) (b)898 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 MALTSEV ments in the study of this problem were made in the papers [10, 13] where deep topological theorems about the behavior of trajectories of system (1.1) were proved.
In particular, the results obtained in [10] and [13] give a basis for description of the stable (regular) non-closed trajectories of system (1.1) with arbitrary (p) which will be also considered in the present paper.
Let us formulate here the properties of the sta- ble (with respect to small rotations of B or small varia- tions of the Fermi energy  ) open trajectories of sys- tem (1.1), which play, from our point of view, the most important role in the magneto-transport phenomena in normal metals: (1) Every stable open trajectory of system (1.1) lies in a straight strip of a finite width in the plane orthogonal to B and passes through it from –∞ to +∞ (Fig. 4); (2) All the stable open trajectories at a given direc- tion of B have the same mean direction in p-space, which is given by the intersection of the plane, orthog- onal to B, and some locally stable integral plane in the p-space.
The properties formulated above were used in [15] for the introduction of important topological charac- teristics of electron spectra in metals observable in the transport phenomena in strong magnetic fields.
These characteristics were called in [15] the topological quan- tum numbers observable in the conductivity of normal metals and can be described in the following way: First, according to property (1) we should observe a strong anisotropy of conductivity in the plane orthogonal to B in the limit ωBτ → ∞ in the case of presence of stable open trajectories on the Fermi sur- face.
The limiting values of the conductivity tensor σkl(B) are given by the formula (1.2) and we can define the mean direction of the open trajectories of (1.1) as the direction of the lowest conductivity in the plane orthogonal to B for ωBτ ≫ 1.
Due to the stability prop- erties of the open trajectories we can define also these directions for close directions of B and define an inte- gral plane Γ, which is swept by the directions of the lowest conductivity in a given “Stability Zone” in the space of directions of B. Let us mention here that integral character of the plane Γ in the p-space means that it is generated by some two reciprocal lattice vectors q1, q2: In the x-space the plane Γ can be given by an indivis- ible triple of integers (M1, M2, M3) from the equation where (l1, l2, l3) represent the basis of the direct lattice.
The numbers (M1, M2, M3) were called in [15] the topo- logical quantum numbers observable in conductivity of e F e Γ = λ + μ λ μ ∈ 1 2 { , , }, q q R = + + = + + 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 2 1 1 2 2 3 3 , , n n n m m m q a a a q a a a ∈ 1 2 3 1 2 3 , , , , , .
n n n m m m Z + + = 1 1 2 2 3 3 ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) 0, M M M x l x l x l normal metals and represent the homology classes of two-dimensional “carriers of open trajectories” in the torus  .
Let us say that the triples (M1, M2, M3) can be rather nontrivial for complicated Fermi surfaces and represent (together with the geometry of the “Stability Zones”) an important characteristic of the electron spectrum in a metal.
Another important property of the stable open tra- jectories of system (1.1) is that they never appear together with more complicated (unstable) chaotic open trajectories (chaotic trajectories of Tsarev or Dynnikov type) at the same direction of B [16].
As a result, the contribution of the trajectories shown at Fig. 4 to the conductivity represents the only nontriv- ial part of the tensor σkl(B) in the “Stability Zone” and is easily observable in experiments.
Let us say here also, that the consideration of “chaotic” trajectories of system (1.1) will not be a subject of the present paper.
The most detailed mathematical survey on the geometry of trajectories of system (1.1) is represented in the paper [16].
The detailed description of the phys- ical phenomena based on topological investigations of the system (1.1) can be found in the papers [17–19].
Let us give also a reference to the paper [20] where a convenient mathematical method of numerical inves- tigation of the structure of Stability Zones, suggested by I.A. Dynnikov, was used by R. De Leo for investi- gation of Stability Zones for a set of analytical dispersion relations, used as approximations to dispersion relations in real crystals.
We can give here also a reference to the papers [14, 21–30] devoted to investigation of different aspects of chaotic trajectories of system (1.1), which can arise on rather complicated Fermi surfaces.
The present paper will be devoted to the methods of experimental determination of the boundaries of exact mathematical “Stability Zones”, which rep- resents in fact a nontrivial problem from experimental point of view.
Let us say at once that we define the exact mathematical Stability Zone Ωα as a region on the angle diagram (unit sphere  ) corresponding to the presence of the stable open trajectories with the same topological quantum numbers ( ,  ,  ) on the Fermi surface.
According to this definition, the open trajectories of system (1.1) exist for any B/B ∈ Ωα, are stable with respect to small rotations of B and 3 T 2 S α 1 M α 2 M α 3 M Fig. 4.
The form of a stable open trajectory of system (1.1) in the plane orthogonal to B.JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 OSCILLATION PHENOMENA AND EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 899 define the same integral plane Γα in the p-space.
The Stability Zone Ωα, defined in this way, represents a finite region on the unit sphere   with a piecewise smooth boundary (Fig. 5).
Let us say, however, that the full set of directions of B, corresponding to the presence of the open trajecto- ries on the Fermi surface, has in general more compli- cated structure.
Thus, it was first pointed out in [31] that the regions on the angle diagram, corresponding to appearance of the open trajectories, should have in fact a singular structure, which is caused by the differ- ence between periodic and non-periodic trajectories arising on the Fermi surface.
Using general topologi- cal description of the stable open trajectories of system (1.1) it can be shown that a general Stability Zone Ωα on   has necessarily an everywhere dense “net” of directions B ∈ Ωα, where the stable open trajectories of system (1.1) are actually periodic [32].
Moreover, this net should be in fact extended outside the Zone Ωα, since the periodic open trajectories still exist on its segments near the boundary of Ωα.
Let us note here, that according to our definition we don’t include the corresponding segments into the Zone Ωα since the corresponding trajectories are not stable anymore with respect to small rotations of B.
Besides that, the closed electron trajectories near the boundary of Ωα have in fact very specific form which makes them hardly distin- guishable from the open trajectories from experimental point of view.
As a result, the “experimentally observ- able Stability Zone”   is actually different from the exact mathematical Stability Zone (Fig. 6).
Let us say also that due to the difference between the periodic and non-periodic trajectories the analytic dependence of the values σkl(B) both on the value and the direction of B is actually rather complicated both in the Zone Ωα and   (see [32]).
As a result, the exact 2 S 2 S α Ωˆ α Ωˆ boundary of a mathematical Stability Zone Ωα is in fact unobservable in direct measurements of the values σkl(B) even for rather big values of B.
On the other hand, the exact form of the mathe- matical Stability Zones Ωα represents an important characteristic of the dispersion relation (p) and can play rather important role in the reconstruction of the form of the Fermi surface from experimental data.
In the present paper we will show that the oscillation phenomena in normal metals give in fact a convenient way to determine the boundary of the Zones Ωα, which is based on the general topological structure of the “carriers of open trajectories” on the Fermi sur- face.
In the next chapter we will give a description of the topological structure of a (complicated) Fermi surface in the presence of the stable open trajectories of system (1.1) and discuss special features of the oscil- lation phenomena on the surfaces of this kind. 2.
SPECIAL TOPOLOGICAL  REPRESENTATION OF A FERMI SURFACE  CONTAINING STABLE OPEN TRAJECTORIES  AND THE OSCILLATION PHENOMENA IN NORMAL METALS To describe the special topological representation of a complicated Fermi surface in presence of the sta- ble open trajectories of system (1.1) let us introduce first a model Fermi surface, having the following form: Consider a periodic set of parallel integral planes in p-space, connected by cylinders of finite heights (Fig. 7).
Let us divide all the planes into two different classes (I and II)—the odd-numbered planes and the even- numbered planes.
Let us assume now that the planes of each class can be obtained from each other by a shift on some reciprocal lattice vector and represent the e Fig. 5.
An exact mathematical Stability Zone Ωα on the unit sphere  , corresponding to a fixed triple ( ,  ,  ).
Ωα 2 S α 1 M α 2 M α 3 M Fig. 6.
The “experimentally observable Stability Zones” with nets of special directions of B on the angle diagram.
Ωα Ωβ Ωβ ˆ Ωα ˆ900 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 MALTSEV same object after the factorization over the reciprocal lattice.
In the same way, we assume that the cylinders are also divided into two classes which represent just two non-equivalent objects after the factorization.
We can say then that the periodic surface described above gives an example of a Fermi surface, which is represented as a pair of two parallel two-dimensional tori   ⊂   embedded in   and two cylinders of finite heights, connecting the tori  .
Let us assume now that the axes of the cylinders are almost parallel in p-space and consider a magnetic field having a direction close to the direction of the axes of the cylinders.
It is not difficult to see that if the direction of B is almost parallel to the cylinders then the cylinders consist mostly of closed trajectories of system (1.1), which cut our Fermi surface into separate parallel (deformed) planes.
It can be also noted that the closed trajectories arising on the cylinders of dif- ferent types also belong to different (the electron-type or the hole-type) types.
The open trajectories of sys- tem (1.1) are given by the intersections of the planes, orthogonal to B, with the periodically deformed inte- gral planes in p-space and have the regular form shown at Fig. 4.
The parts of the Fermi surface, consisting of closed trajectories, represent cylinders, restricted by singular trajectories, with heights, depending on the direction of B. Thus, we have a Stability Zone around our initial direction of B with topological quantum numbers, defined by the homology class of the integral planes introduced above.
The boundary of the Stability Zone is defined by the condition that the height of the cylinders of one type becomes zero, such that the corresponding closed trajectories disappear on the Fermi surface (Fig. 8).
As a result, the remaining closed trajectories can not cut the Fermi surface anymore into separate planes and we do not have stable open trajectories after the crossing the boundary of a Stability Zone.
Thus, a Sta- bility Zone represents in general a region with a piece- wise smooth boundary in the space of directions of B. 2 T 3 T 3 T 2 T Let us note, that we don’t claim here that the open trajectories of system (1.1) completely disappear out- side the Stability Zone Ω. Indeed, we can see that the remaining cylinders of closed trajectories now cut the Fermi surface into connected pairs of integral planes and the trajectories of system (1.1) still admit an effec- tive description near the boundary of the Zone Ω.
It is not difficult to see, that the trajectories can now “jump” between two planes which gives a reconstruc- tion of the open trajectories after the crossing of the boundary of the Zone Ω. It can be seen also that all the open trajectories will transform into long closed tra- jectories if the intersection of the plane, orthogonal to B, with the integral planes has an irrational direction in the p-space.
At the same time, if the intersection of the plane, orthogonal to B, and the integral planes has a rational direction, then we will have both the long closed trajectories and the open periodic trajectories near the boundary of the Zone Ω.
The open periodic trajectories, however, are not stable outside the Zone Ω, so we should not include the corresponding set of directions of B in the mathematical Stability Zone.
At the same time, this set belongs to the “experimen- tally observable Stability Zone,” which includes the mathematical Stability Zone as a subset.
The analyti- cal properties of the conductivity in the experimentally observable Stability Zone are in fact rather compli- cated (see [32]), which makes the experimental deter- mination of the boundary of a mathematical Stability Zone a non-trivial problem.
The picture described above represents a Fermi surface of genus 3, embedded in the three-dimen- sional torus  , and gives an example of complicated enough Fermi surface from topological point of view.
In general, the topological representation of any com- plicated Fermi surface, carrying stable open trajecto- ries of system (1.1), can differ from that described above in the following details: (1) The number of non-equivalent cylinders of closed trajectories can be bigger (or less) than 2. 3 T Fig. 7.
A model Fermi surface of genus 3 in p-space with stable open trajectories of system (1.1). B I II I Fig. 8.
A very short cylinder of closed trajectories of one type for a direction of B, close to the boundary of a Stabil- ity Zone.
BJOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 OSCILLATION PHENOMENA AND EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 901 (2) There can be additional cylinders of closed tra- jectories on the integral planes, having a point as a base.
(3) The number of non-equivalent parallel integral planes can be bigger than 2, being any even number (Fig. 9).
The general statement formulated above represents a corollary of rather deep topological theorems, proved in the papers [10, 13, 16].
Let us say that the sit- uation (3) can be observed actually only for surfaces of very high genus, so, for many real metals it actually does not arise.
Let us note also, that the situation (3) can be considered also as an “overlapping” of two (or more) Stability Zones with the same topological quantum numbers.
As was pointed out in [32], the analytical properties of conductivity are the most complicated in this situation, in particular, we should observe here more than one boundary of a Stability Zone (Fig. 10).
In any situation the boundary of an exact mathe- matical Stability Zone is defined by vanishing of one of the cylinders of closed trajectories, so, as we will see below, the study of the oscillation phenomena gives in fact a convenient instrument to detect the boundary of a Stability Zone in experiment.
Let us say also here, that the picture described above represents a purely topological representation of a Fermi surface, carrying stable open trajectories (or, bet- ter to say, a topological representation of system (1.1) on the Fermi surface), and can be visually much more complicated due to possible complicated geometry of the objects, introduced above.
Below we will consider the oscillation phenomena in the picture described above and describe their spe- cial features near the boundary of a Stability Zone.
Certainly, we will not give here a detailed theoretical exposition of the phenomena we are going to consider and give just a reference on their standard description (see e.g. [7, 33–35]).
Let us start with the (classical) cyclotron resonance phenomenon, which can be described with the aid of the purely kinetic approach for the electron gas in nor- mal metals.
As it is well known, the cyclotron reso- nance phenomenon is connected with the oscillating dependence of the surface conductivity on the fre- quency of the alternating field in presence of a strong magnetic field B.
In the most common setting, the direction of B is assumed to be parallel to the metal surface and the alternating electric field can have dif- ferent directions in the same plane.
The oscillating behavior of the surface conductivity (in the situation of anomalous skin effect) is caused by the coincidence of the frequency Ω of the incident wave with the values nωB, n ∈ , where ωB = ωB(pz) is the cyclotron frequency, defined for every closed trajectory of system (1.1).
In general, ωB(pz) represents a complicated function of pz and the oscillating behavior of conductivity is deter- mined in fact by the extremal values of ωB(pz), satisfy- ing the condition dωB/dpz = 0.
In the geometric picture described above the closed trajectories are combined into cylinders connecting integral planes and we have the relation ωB(pz) = 0 on the bases of the cylinders.
As a result, the positive function ωB(pz) should have at least one maximum at every cylinder, i.e. every cylinder of closed trajectories contains at least one extremal trajectory in the sense pointed above.
Let us say, that theoretically we can have several maxima and minima of the function ωB(pz) on a cylinder of closed trajectories, however, the situation of several critical points of ωB(pz) on the same cylinder requires in fact rather complicated geometry of the dispersion relation.
For simplicity, we will assume here that all the cylinders of closed trajec- tories contain just one extremal (maximal) value of ωB(pz).
As we will see, more complicated cases do not contain any fundamental differences from the simple case under consideration. N Fig. 9.
Topological representation of a Fermi surface of a very high genus carrying stable open trajectories of system (1.1). . . . B Fig. 10.
A complicated Stability Zone, representing an over- lapping of two Zones with the same topological numbers.902 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol. 125   No. 5   2017 MALTSEV Let us make also another remark.
For Fermi sur- faces of not very high genus the boundary of a Stability Zone is defined by disappearance of just one cylinder of closed trajectories of system (1.1), which is invariant under the transformation p → –p.
In this case the extremal value of B corresponds to the central cross- section of the cylinder by the plane orthogonal to B (Fig. 11).
For more complicated Fermi surfaces (of a high genus) we can also have the situation when two non-equivalent cylinders, which transform into each other under the transformation p → –p, disappear simultaneously on the boundary of a Stability Zone.
Let us say, however, that this situation requires in fact a really complicated Fermi surface, so, in most of experiments we can actually assume the first case.
Let us note also here, that the first situation has also the additional property on the extremal trajectories, which permits in fact not to impose the strict condition that B is parallel to the metal surface.
〈 〉 = tr 0 z gr v Coming back to the cyclotron resonance phenom- enon, we can see then that for the structure of the Fermi surface described above the oscillating conduc- tivity behavior in high frequency electric fields should reveal a finite number of the main terms, representing the contribution of the extremal trajectories on the cylinders of closed trajectories and also of the end- points of the special (degenerate) cylinders at Fig. 9.
Let us also note here that the last contribution actually does not arise if the direction of E in the incident wave is orthogonal to our fixed direction of B.
Every main term is characterized by a periodic dependence on the frequency Ω (or on 1/B) with its own period Ti.
For directions of B lying inside a Stability Zone Ωα the periods Ti(B/B) represent smooth functions of the direction of B and one of the periods   becomes infinite at the boundary of the Stability Zone (Fig. 12).
After crossing the boundary of a mathematical Stabil- ity Zone Ωα the corresponding contribution disap- pears completely, while all the other main contribu- tions do not notably change (Fig. 13).
Let us specially note here that both the vanishing of one of the main oscillating terms in the conductivity and increasing of its period   have very sharp charac- ter near the boundary of a Stability Zone.
Indeed, the main oscillating terms in conductivity are given by the contributions of very narrow “bands” of closed trajec- tories near the extremal trajectories, which do not change noticeably up to the boundary of the Zone Ωα.
In the same way, a noticeable increasing of the period  is caused by a close approach of the singular trajec- tories to the extremal trajectory on a cylinder of closed trajectories (Fig. 8).
It can be also shown, that this effect starts to manifest itself in a pretty narrow region near the boundary of Ωα.
As a result, the intermediate picture represented at Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 can in fact be 0iT 0iT 0iT Fig. 11.
The extremal trajectory on a cylinder of closed tra- jectories of system (1.1). B Fig. 12.
(Color online) The increasing of the period of one of the main oscillating terms in the surface conductivity (real or imag- inary part) near the boundary in a Stability Zone.
σ σ 1/B 1/BJOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol.
125   No. 5   2017 OSCILLATION PHENOMENA AND EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 903 practically unobservable in the experimental study of the cyclotron resonance phenomenon, such that we will most probably observe actually a more sharp tran- sition (Fig. 14) after crossing the boundary of a Stabil- ity Zone.
We can see then that, despite the fact that the long closed trajectories arising outside a Stability Zone are hardly distinguishable from the open trajectories from experimental point of view, the cyclotron resonance phenomenon provides us a good tool for exact experi- mental determination of the boundary of a mathemat- ical Stability Zone.
Let us note also that the long closed trajectories arising near the boundary of a mathematical Stability Zone correspond to very large periods of electron motion along the orbit which can exceed the free electron motion time, so, they do not give in this case any visible contribution in the cyclo- tron resonance picture in experiment.
Let us discuss now briefly quantum oscillations phenomena in normal metals among which the oscil- lations of the magnetic susceptibility (De Haas–Van Alphen effect) and of the conductivity (Shubnikov– De Haas effect) with a change in the value of 1/B are the most often mentioned.
The common reason for the quantum oscillation phenomena in normal metals is the quantization of the electron motion along the closed trajectories of system (1.1) in the plane orthogonal to B.
In the qua- siclassical approximation we should put now that the Fig. 13.
(Color online) The disappearance of one of the main oscillating contributions in the surface conductivity after crossing the boundary of a Stability Zone.
1/B 1/B σ σ Fig. 14.
(Color online) The schematic sharp change of the experimental picture of oscillations of the surface conductivity after crossing the boundary of a Stability Zone.
It can be seen that the change in the oscillatory behavior is represented by the disap- pearance of one of the main oscillation terms from a finite sum of such terms.
1/B 1/B σ σ904 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol.
125   No. 5   2017 MALTSEV closed trajectories of system (1.1) should be selected in accordance with the quantization rule where S( , pz) is the area bounded by a closed trajec- tory of system (1.1) in the plane orthogonal to B in the p-space.
The quantum oscillations of physical quantities measured in metals are connected then with the cross- ing of the Fermi level by the corresponding quantized energy levels which defines us the period of the corre- sponding oscillations, brought by a fixed closed trajec- tory on the Fermi surface Like in the case of the cyclotron resonance the main terms in the oscillating behavior are brought by the extremal closed trajectories, which are defined now by the condition dS/dpz = 0.
As in the previous situation, we can expect here the presence of a finite number of trajectories of this kind on every cylinder, connecting integral planes, if B/B ∈ Ωα.
Thus, the oscillating behavior of the physical quantities should be mainly represented here by several main oscillating terms, having different periods in the variable 1/B. For not extremely complicated Fermi surfaces we can expect again that every cylinder of closed trajecto- ries of system (1.1) contains just one trajectory corre- sponding to an extremal area in the p-space.
Besides that, for the Fermi surfaces of not very high genus we can expect that every cylinder of closed trajectories is invariant under the transformation p → –p, so, every extremal trajectory on this cylinder represents in fact its central cross-section by the plane orthogonal to B. Let us say, however, that for very complicated Fermi surfaces the assumptions above are not necessarily ful- filled.
In particular, in the situation when we have pairs of cylinders, transforming into each other under the transformation p → –p, the extremal trajectories on them can be located near the bases of the cylinders.
In general, the details pointed above do not change noticeably the scheme of using quantum oscillations phenomena for the determination of the exact bound- ary of Stability Zones for magneto-conductivity in normal metals.
Like in the case of the cyclotron resonance, we should observe here a “quick change” in the picture of oscillations of physical quantities after crossing the boundary of a Stability Zone, which is caused by the disappearance of one (or more) of the cylinders of closed trajectories of system (1.1).
Also in this case the changes are sharply expressed at the boundary of Ωα ( ) π = + ℏ ≫ 2 1 ( , ) , 1, 2 z e B S p n n c e e π Δ = ℏ 1 2 .
( , ) F z e B cS p e ( ) π Δ = ℏ extr 1 2 i i e B cS since the corresponding main term in the oscillation picture is brought by an extremal trajectory, which remains almost the same up to the boundary of Ωα and disappears abruptly after crossing the boundary.
The changes in the oscillation picture have the form, simi- lar to that observed in the cyclotron resonance, show- ing the disappearance of one of the main oscillation terms (Fig. 14).
Let us just note, that in this case we should not see at all an increasing of the correspond- ing period of oscillations near the boundary of Ωα, since it is defined now by the area restricted by an extremal trajectory (and not cyclotron frequency), which does not change much near the boundary of a Stability Zone.
At last, let us make one more additional remark.
As we saw above, the description of the quantum oscillations in normal metals is connected with the area bounded by an extremal trajectory in the plane orthogonal to B.
The extremal trajectories in the the- ory of the cyclotron resonance are defined by the extremal values of the cyclotron frequency, which is actually connected with the value ∂S( , pz)/∂ accord- ing to the formulae At the same time, the value ∂S( , pz)/∂ can be measured also in the experimental study of the quan- tum oscillations, using the investigation of their tem- perature dependence [7, 33–35].
We would like to point out here, that the values of ∂S( , pz)/∂, mea- sured by these two different ways should coincide in fact for B/B ∈ Ωα for most of the real metals having not extremely complicated Fermi surfaces.
The reason of this coincidence is given here by the fact, that both the cyclotron resonance phenomenon and the quan- tum oscillations phenomena are connected with the same extremal trajectories, given by the central cross- sections of the cylinders of closed trajectories in the topological representation of the Fermi surface according to Fig. 9.
At the same time, for metals with extremely complicated Fermi surfaces, this circum- stance may not take place in general, so, the values of ∂S( , pz)/∂, measured in these two different ways, can be different, since they are connected now with different extremal trajectories of system (1.1).
It’s not difficult to see, that our last remark has no direct rela- tionship to the determination of the boundaries of the Stability Zones in metals, however, it can play a role in more detailed investigation of the oscillation phenom- ena for B/B ∈ Ωα. 3.
CONCLUSIONS We consider the problem of the exact determina- tion of the boundary of a Stability Zone for magneto- conductivity of normal metals in the space of direc- tions of B.
As can be shown, this problem is actually e e ∂ ω = = π ∂ ( , ) 1 , * .
* 2 z B S p eB m m c e e e e e e e eJOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS   Vol.
125   No. 5   2017 OSCILLATION PHENOMENA AND EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 905 rather nontrivial from experimental point of view due to a substantial difference between the exact mathe- matical Stability Zones and the “experimentally observable Stability Zones” in the direct conductivity measurements.
It can be shown, however, that the experimental detection of the exact boundary of a Sta- bility Zone can be effectively implemented with the aid of the well-known oscillation phenomena such as the cyclotron resonance or quantum oscillations in normal metals.
Thus, the experimental study of oscil- lation phenomena in sufficiently strong magnetic fields reveals a sharp change in the picture of the oscil- latory behavior of physical quantities after crossing the boundary of the mathematical Stability Zone as func- tions of the value of B for a given direction of the mag- netic field.
This abrupt change in the oscillatory behavior can be described in the general case as the disappearance of one of the principal terms from the total contribution, represented by a final sum of such terms (Fig. 14).
So, a detailed study of the oscillatory behavior of physical quantities at different directions of B allows us actually to determine the precise bound- aries of the mathematical Stability Zones for the mag- neto-conductivity of metals.
The results of the paper are based on the topological description of the struc- ture of the Fermi surface in the case of presence of sta- ble open quasiclassical electron trajectories on it.
REFERENCES 1. I. M. Lifshits, M. Ya.
Azbel’, and M. I. Kaganov, Sov. Phys. JETP 4, 41 (1957).
2. I. M. Lifshits and V. G. Peschanskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 8, 875 (1958).
3. I. M. Lifshits and V. G. Peschanskii, Sov. Phys.
JETP 11, 137 (1960).
4. I. M. Lifshits and M. I. Kaganov, Sov. Phys. Usp. 2, 831 (1959).
5. I. M. Lifshits and M. I. Kaganov, Sov. Phys. Usp. 5, 878 (1962).
6. I. M. Lifshits and M. I. Kaganov, Sov. Phys. Usp. 7, 805 (1965).
7. I. M. Lifshits, M. Ya.
Azbel’, and M. I. Kaganov, Elec- tron Theory of Metals (Nauka, Moscow, 1971; Consul- tants Bureau, New York, 1973).
8. M. I. Kaganov and V. G. Peschansky, Phys.
Rep. 372, 445 (2002).
9. S. P. Novikov, Russ. Math. Surv. 37, 1 (1982).
10. A. V. Zorich, Russ. Math. Surv. 39, 287 (1984).
11. I. A. Dynnikov, Russ. Math. Surv. 47, 172 (1992). 12.
S. P. Tsarev, Private Commun. (1992–1993).
13. I. A. Dynnikov, Math. Notes 53, 495 (1993).
14. I. A. Dynnikov, in Solitons, Geometry, and Topology: On the Crossroad, Vol. 179 of Am. Math. Soc.
Transl., Ser. 2 (Am. Math.
Soc., Providence, RI, 1997), p. 45. 15.
S. P. Novikov and A. Ya.
Mal’tsev, JETP Lett. 63, 855 (1996).
16. I. A. Dynnikov, Russ. Math. Surv. 54, 21 (1999). 17.
S. P. Novikov and A. Ya. Mal’tsev, Phys.
Usp. 41, 231 (1998). 18. A. Ya.
Maltsev and S. P. Novikov, Bull. Braz. Math. Soc., New Ser. 34, 171 (2003). 19. A. Ya.
Maltsev and S. P. Novikov, J. Stat.
Phys. 115, 31 (2004). 20.
R. de Leo, Phys. B: Condens.
Matter 362, 62 (2005).
21. A. V. Zorich, in Proceedings of the Conference on Geo- metric Study of Foliations, Tokyo, November 1993, Ed.
by T. Mizutani et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1994), p. 479. 22. A. Ya. Maltsev, J. Exp. Theor.
Phys.85, 934 (1997). 23. R. de Leo, Russ. Math. Surv. 55, 166 (2000). 24. R. de Leo, Russ. Math.
Surv. 58, 1042 (2003). 25. R. de Leo, Exp.
Math. 15, 109 (2006). 26.
R. de Leo and I. A. Dynnikov, Russ. Math. Surv. 62, 990 (2007). 27.
R. de Leo and I. A. Dynnikov, Geom.
Dedicata 138, 51 (2009).
28. A. Skripchenko, Discrete Contin. Dyn.
Syst. 32, 643 (2012).
29. A. Skripchenko, Ann. Glob. Anal.
Geom. 43, 253 (2013).
30. I. Dynnikov and A. Skripchenko, in Topology, Geome- try, Integrable Systems, and Mathematical Physics: Novikov’s Seminar 2012–2014, Advances in the Mathe- matical Sciences, Vol. 234 of Am. Math. Soc.
Transl., Ser. 2, Ed.
by V. M. Buchstaber, B. A. Dubrovin, and I. M. Krichever (Am. Math.
Soc., Providence, RI, 2014), p. 173; arXiv:1309.4884. 31.
R. N. Gurzhi and A. I. Kopeliovich, in Conductivity Electrons, Ed. M. I. Kaganov and V. S. Edel’man (Nauka, Moscow, 1985) [in Russian]. 32. A. Ya. Mal’tsev, J. Exp. Theor.
Phys.124, 805 (2017). 33. Ch.
Kittel, Quantum Theory of Solids (Wiley, New York, 1963).
34. A. A. Abrikosov, Fundamentals of the Theory of Metals (Elsevier Science, Oxford, UK, 1988; Nauka, Moscow, 1987). 35.
J. M. Ziman, Principles of the Theory of Solids (Cam- bridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 1972).